<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>The ballrooms of the Splendor, peopled, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen indulgently noted, with Goodness knows who from Heaven knows where, received her and her guests.</p>
			<p>Not all of them, however. At the entrance, Verelst, pretexting a pretext, sagely dropped out. Within, a young man with ginger hair and laughing eyes, sprang from nowhere, pounced at Kate, floated her away.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, Margaret, Lennox and Paliser moved on.</p>
			<p>In one room there was dancing; in another, a stage. It was in the first room that Kate was abducted. On the stage in the room beyond, a fat woman, dressed in green and gauze, was singing faded idiocies. Beyond, at the other end of the room was a booth above which was a sign⁠—The Veiled Lady of Yucatan. Beneath the sign was a notice: All ye that enter here leave five dollars at the door.</p>
			<p>The booth, hung with black velvet, was additionally supplied with hierograms in burnished steel. What they meant was not for the profane, or even for the initiate. Champollion could not have deciphered them. Fronting the door stood a young woman with a dark skin, a solemn look and a costume which, at a pinch, might have been Maya.</p>
			<p>In those accents which the Plaza shares with Mayfair, she hailed Margaret. “Hello, dear! Your turn next.”</p>
			<p>For a moment, the dark skin, the solemn look, the costume puzzled Margaret. Then at once she exclaimed: “Why, Poppet!” She paused and added: “This is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser⁠—Miss Bleecker. You know <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox.”</p>
			<p>But now, from the booth, a large woman with high colour, grey hair and a jewelled lorgnette rushed out and fastened herself on the sultry girl.</p>
			<p>“Gimme back my money. Your veiled lady is a horror! Said I’d marry again!”</p>
			<p>She raised her glasses. “Mary Austen, as I’m a sinner! Go in and have your misfortunes told. How do do Margaret? Marry again indeed! Oughtn’t I to have my money back?”</p>
			<p>“Poppet ought to make you pay twice,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen heartlessly retorted at this woman, the relict of Nicholas Amsterdam, concerning whom a story had come out and who had died, his friends said, of exposure.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Amsterdam turned on Paliser whom she had never seen before. “What do you say?”</p>
			<p>“I am appalled,” he answered.</p>
			<p>She turned again. “There, Poppet, you hear that? Gimme back my money.”</p>
			<p>But Miss Bleecker occupied herself with Lennox, who was paying for Margaret.</p>
			<p>Margaret entered the booth where a little old woman, very plainly dressed, sat at a small deal table. From above hung a light. Beside her was a vacant chair.</p>
			<p>“Sit there, please,” the medium, in a low voice, told the girl. “And now, if you please, your hand.”</p>
			<p>Margaret, seating herself, removed a glove. The hand in which she then put hers was soft and warm and she feared that it might perspire. She looked at the woman who looked at her, sighed, closed her eyes and appeared to go to sleep. Then, presently, her lips parted and in a voice totally different from that in which she had just spoken, a voice that was thin and shrill, words came leapingly.</p>
			<p>“You are engaged to be married. Your engagement will be broken. You will be very unhappy. Later, you will be thankful. Later you will realise that sorrow is sent to make us nobler than we were.”</p>
			<p>With an intake of the breath, the medium started, straightened, opened her eyes.</p>
			<p>At the shock of it Margaret had started also. “But⁠—”</p>
			<p>The medium, in her former voice, low and gentle, interrupted.</p>
			<p>“I can tell you nothing else. I do not know what was said. But I am sorry if you have had bad news.”</p>
			<p>Margaret stood up, replacing her glove. She knew, as we all know, that certain gifted organisms hear combinations of sound to which the rest of us are deaf. She knew, as many of us also know, that there are other organisms that can foresee events to which the rest of us are blind. But she knew too that in the same measure that the auditions of composers are not always notable, the visions of clairvoyants are not always exact. The knowledge steadied and partially comforted, but partially only.</p>
			<p>At the entrance, Lennox stood with Miss Bleecker. A little beyond were Paliser and her mother. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Amsterdam, minus her money, must have rushed away.</p>
			<p>Poppet Bleecker laughed and questioned: “No horrors?”</p>
			<p>Lennox questioned also, but with his eyes.</p>
			<p>Margaret hesitated. Then she got it. Taking the girl’s hand she patted it and to Lennox said, and lightly enough: “Do go in. I want to see if what the medium says to you conforms with what she said to me.”</p>
			<p>Yet, however lightly she spoke, behind her girdle was that sensation which only the tormented know.</p>
			<p>Beyond on the stage, the fat woman, now at the piano, was accompanying a girl who was singing a <i xml:lang="it">brindisi</i>. The girl was young, good-looking, unembarrassed, very much at home. Her dress, a black chiffon, became her.</p>
			<p>Then, in a moment, as Lennox entered the booth, Margaret joined her mother and looked at the girl.</p>
			<p>“What is she singing?”</p>
			<p>Paliser covered her with his eyes. “Verdi’s ‘<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Segreto per esser felice</span>’⁠—the secret of happiness. Such a simple secret too.”</p>
			<p>“Yes?” Margaret absently returned. She was looking now at the booth. Quite as vaguely she added: “In what does it consist?”</p>
			<p>“In getting what we do not deserve.”</p>
			<p>There was nothing in that to offend. But the man’s eyes, of which already she had been conscious, did offend. They seemed to disrobe her. Annoyedly she turned.</p>
			<p>Paliser turned with her. “Verdi’s bric-a-brac is very banal. Perhaps you prefer Strauss. His dissonances are more harmonic than they sound.”</p>
			<p>Now though there was applause. With a roulade the <i xml:lang="it">brindisi</i> had ceased and the singer as though pleased, not with herself but with the audience, bowed. The fat woman twisting on her bench, was also smiling. She looked cheerful and evil.</p>
			<p>“I do believe that’s the Tamburini,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen remarked. “I heard her at the Academy, ages ago.” The usual touch followed. “How she has gone off!”</p>
			<p>The fat woman stood up, and, preceded by the girl, descended into the audience.</p>
			<p>Margaret looked again at the booth. Lennox was coming out. He said a word to Miss Bleecker and glanced about the room.</p>
			<p>Margaret motioned. He did not notice. The girl who had been singing was bearing down on him, a hand outstretched and, in her face, an expression which Margaret could not interpret. But she saw Lennox smile, take her hand and say⁠—what? Margaret could not tell, but it was something to which the girl was volubly replying.</p>
			<p>“Who’s his little friend?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen in her even voice inquired. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser,” she added. “Would you mind telling⁠—er⁠—my daughter’s young man that we are waiting.”</p>
			<p>Margaret winced. She had turned from Paliser and she turned then from her mother.</p>
			<p>Paliser, whom the phrase “my daughter’s young man” amused, sauntered away. He strolled on to where Lennox stood with the girl. The fat woman joined them.</p>
			<p>Lennox must have introduced Paliser, for Margaret could see them all talking at once. Then Lennox again looked about, saw Margaret and her mother, and came over.</p>
			<p>“Who’s your friend?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen asked.</p>
			<p>Lennox’ eyes caressed Margaret. Then he turned to her mother. “She is a Miss Cara. Cassy Cara her name is. I know her father. He is a violinist.”</p>
			<p>And my daughter is second fiddle, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, who said: “How interesting!”</p>
			<p>With his sombre air, Lennox summarised it. “She is studying for the opera. The woman with her, Madame Tamburini, is her coach. You may have heard of her.”</p>
			<p>“A fallen star,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen very pleasantly remarked. Quite as pleasantly she added: “The proper companion for a soiled dove.”</p>
			<p>The charm of that was lost. Margaret, who had not previously seen this girl but who had heard of her from Lennox, was speaking to him.</p>
			<p>“It was her father, was it?” Then, dismissing it, she asked anxiously: “But do tell me, Keith, what did the medium say?”</p>
			<p>“That I would be up for murder.”</p>
			<p>Margaret’s eyes widened. But, judging it ridiculous, she exclaimed: “Was that all?”</p>
			<p>“All!” Lennox grimly repeated. “What more would you have?” Abruptly he laughed. “I don’t wonder <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Amsterdam wanted her money back.”</p>
			<p>On the stage, from jungles of underwear, legs were tossing. The orchestra had become frankly canaille. Moreover the crowd of Goodness knows who had increased. A person had the temerity to elbow <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen and the audacity to smile at her. It was the finishing touch.</p>
			<p>She poked at Margaret. “Come.”</p>
			<p>As they moved on, a man smiled at Lennox, who, without stopping, gave him a hand.</p>
			<p>He was an inkbeast. But there was nothing commercial in his appearance. Ordinarily, he looked like a somnambulist. When he was talking, he resembled a comedian. In greeting Lennox he seemed to be in a pleasant dream. The crowd swallowed him.</p>
			<p>“Who was that?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen enquired.</p>
			<p>“Ten Eyck Jones.”</p>
			<p>“The writer?” asked this lady, who liked novels, but who preferred to live them.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Paliser was talking to Cassy Cara and the Tamburini. The latter listened idly, with her evil smile. Yet Paliser’s name was very evocative. The syllables had fallen richly on her ears.</p>
			<p>Cassy Cara had not heard them and they would have conveyed nothing to her if she had. She was a slim girl, with a lot of auburn hair which was docked. The careless-minded thought her pretty. She was what is far rarer; she was handsome. Her features had the surety of an intaglio. Therewith was an air and a look that were not worldly or even superior, but which, when necessary as she sometimes found it, could reduce a man, and for that matter a woman, to proportions really imperceptible.</p>
			<p>A little beauty and a little devil, thought Paliser, who was an expert. But leisurely, in his Oxford voice, he outlined for her a picture less defined. “You remind me of something.”</p>
			<p>With entire brevity and equal insolence, she returned it. “I dare say.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. Of supper.”</p>
			<p>“An ogre, are you?”</p>
			<p>Paliser, ruminating the possibilities of her slim beauty served <i xml:lang="fr">Régence</i>, smiled at this girl who did not smile back. “Not Nebuchadnezzar at any rate. Vegetarianism is not my forte. Won’t you and Madame Tamburini take potluck with me? There must be a restaurant somewhere.”</p>
			<p>The fallen star moistened her painted lips. “Yes, why not?”</p>
			<p>Born in California, of foreign parents, she had neither morals or accent and spoke in a deep voice. She spoke American and English. She spoke the easy French of the boulevards, the easier Italian of the operatic stage. She never spoke of Tamburini. She left him to be imagined, which perhaps he had been.</p>
			<p>From the room they went on into a wide, crowded hall, beyond which was another room, enclosed in glass, where there were tables and palms.</p>
			<p>As they entered, a captain approached. There was a smell of pineapple, the odour of fruit and flowers. From a gallery came the tinkle of mandolins. Mainly the tables were occupied. But the captain, waving the way, piloted them to a corner, got them seated and stood, pad in hand.</p>
			<p>Paliser looked at Cassy Cara. She was hungry as a wolf, but she said indifferently: “A swallow of anything.”</p>
			<p>“One swallow does not make a supper,” Paliser retorted and looked at the Tamburini who appeared less indifferent.</p>
			<p>“Ham and eggs.”</p>
			<p>Without a quiver, the captain booked it.</p>
			<p>“Also,” Paliser told him, “caviar, woodcock, Ruinart.” From the man he turned to the girl. “It was very decent of Lennox to introduce me to you.”</p>
			<p>Cassy put her elbows on the table. “He could not be anything else than decent. Don’t you know him well?”</p>
			<p>Paliser shrugged. “Our intimacy is not oppressive.”</p>
			<p>“He saved her father’s life,” the Tamburini put in. “Her father is a musician⁠—and authentically marquis,” she added, as though that explained everything.</p>
			<p>“We are Portuguese,” said Cassy, “or at least my father is. He used to play at the Metro. But he threw it up and one night, when he was coming home from a private house where he had been giving a concert, he was attacked. There were two of them. They knocked him down⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Before he had time to draw his sword-cane,” the fat woman interrupted.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Cassy resumed, “and just then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox came along and knocked them down and saved his violin which was what they were after.”</p>
			<p>“It’s a Cremona,” said the Tamburini who liked details.</p>
			<p>“But that is not all of it,” the girl continued. “My father’s arm was broken. He has not been able to play since. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox brought him home and sent for his own physician. He’s a dear.”</p>
			<p>“Who is?” Paliser asked. “The physician?”</p>
			<p>But now a waiter was upon them with a bottle which he produced with a pop! Dishes followed to which Cassy permitted the man to help her. Her swallow of anything became large spoonfuls of rich blackness and the tenderness of savorous flesh. She was not carnal, but she was hungry and at her home latterly the food had been vile.</p>
			<p>The Tamburini, with enigmatic ideas in the back of her head, ate her horrible dish very delicately, her little finger crooked. But she drank nobly.</p>
			<p>Paliser too had ideas which, however, were not enigmatic in the least and not in the back of his head either. They concerned two young women, one of whom was patently engaged to Lennox and the other probably in love with him. The situation appealed to this too charming young man to whom easy conquests were negligible.</p>
			<p>He had been looking at Cassy. On the table was a vase in which there were flowers. He took two of them and looked again at the girl.</p>
			<p>“Sunday is always hateful. Couldn’t you both dine with me here?”</p>
			<p>The former prima donna wiped her loose mouth. She could, she would, and she said so.</p>
			<p>Paliser put the flowers before Cassy.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Le parlate d’amor</i>,” the ex-diva began and, slightly for a moment, her deep voice mounted.</p>
			<p>Cassy turned on her. “You’re an imbecile.”</p>
			<p>With an uplift of the chin⁠—a family habit⁠—Paliser summoned the waiter. While he was paying him, Cassy protested. She had nothing to wear.</p>
			<p>She had other objections which she kept to herself. If it had been Lennox she would have had none at all. But it was not Lennox. It was a man whom she had never seen before and who was entirely too free with his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Come as you are,” said the Tamburini, who massively stood up.</p>
			<p>Paliser also was rising. “Let me put you in a cab and on Sunday⁠—”</p>
			<p>Cassy gave him a little unsugared look. “You take a great deal for granted.”</p>
			<p>Behind the girl’s back the Tamburini gave him another look. Cheerful and evil and plainer than words it said: “Leave it to me.”</p>
			<p>Cassy, her perfect nose in the air, announced that she must get her things.</p>
			<p>Through the emptying restaurant Paliser saw them to the entrance. There, as he waited, the captain hurried to him.</p>
			<p>“Everything satisfactory, sir?”</p>
			<p>“I want a private dining-room on Sunday.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. For how many?”</p>
			<p>“Two.”</p>
			<p>“Sorry, sir. It’s against the rules.”</p>
			<p>Paliser surveyed him. “Whom does this hotel belong to? You?”</p>
			<p>The captain smiled and caressed his chin. “No, sir, the hotel does not belong to me. It is owned by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you. So I thought. I am <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser. A private dining-room on Sunday for two.”</p>
			<p>But now Cassy and the Tamburini, hatted and cloaked, were returning. The chastened waiter moved aside. Through the still crowded halls, Paliser accompanied them to the street where, a doorkeeper assiduously assisting, he got them into a taxi, asked the addresses, paid the mechanician, saw them off.</p>
			<p>Manfully, as the cab veered, the Tamburini swore.</p>
			<p>“You damn fool, that man is rich as all outdoors.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
