<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXII</h2>
			<p>“Here you are! Bright and late as usual!”</p>
			<p>In her fluted voice, with her agreeable smile, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen greeted him. The lady was attired in a manner that left her glitteringly and splendidly bare. With her, in the cluttered drawing-room, were Margaret, Kate Schermerhorn, Poppet Bleecker, Verelst, Cantillon and Ogston.</p>
			<p>“Will you take my daughter out?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, with that smile, continued. “Oh!” she interrupted herself to remark. “You have not congratulated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cantillon. Has no little bird told you? It’s this dear child Kate. Just now⁠—don’t you think?⁠—engagements, like lilacs, are in the air.” She turned to Verelst. “Grey deceiver!”</p>
			<p>Verelst crooked his arm. “However much I tried to deceive, I got grey before I could.”</p>
			<p>“What are you laughing at?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen with her tireless smile enquired of Paliser, who, after speaking to the girls, had said something to Cantillon.</p>
			<p>“Somersaults being a specialty of his, I was telling him that now is the time for a triple one.”</p>
			<p>Paliser turned to Margaret. She had said nothing. She was very pale. Mute, white, blonde, she was a vision.</p>
			<p>At table, Verelst, addressing him, asked: “How is your father?”</p>
			<p>“Thank you. Enjoying his usual poor health.” He turned again to Margaret. “No one could mistake my father for an auctioneer. He has so few admirations. But he knew your father and admired him greatly.”</p>
			<p>Margaret made no reply. She was thinking of the land of Splendours and Terrors, where the princess sat in chains. Margaret envied her. Over the hill the true knight was hastening and Margaret knew, as we all know, what happened then. It is a very pretty story, but it can be equally sad to a sorrowing girl who has no true knight, or who had one, and who found that he was neither knightly nor true.</p>
			<p>Paliser misconstrued her silence. About her eyes and mouth was an expression that is displayed by those who have suffered from some long malady or from some perilous constraint. That also he misconstrued. He had been told she had washed her hands of Lennox and had washed them with the soap of indifference, which is the most effective of all. He was not credulous but he had believed it. The idea that her throat was choked and her heart a haunt of regret, did not occur to this subtle young man. He attributed both her silence and her expression to neuralgia. The latter did not disturb him. But her loveliness did. It inundated him. The gallery of his memory was hung with fair faces. Her face exceeded them all.</p>
			<p>The dinner proceeded. Presently, Kate Schermerhorn called over at him. “Who was the damsel I saw you making up to in the Park the other day?”</p>
			<p>Paliser turned to her. “I have forgotten.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t wonder. You seemed to have lost your head.”</p>
			<p>“Probably then because it wasn’t you.”</p>
			<p>“Fiddlesticks! You looked as though you could cut your throat for her. Didn’t you feel that way? I am sure you did.”</p>
			<p>“You must be thinking of Cantillon. That’s the way he looks at you. If he didn’t, he wouldn’t have any feeling at all. One might even say he was quite heartless.”</p>
			<p>Kate was laughing. In laughing she showed her red mouth and her teeth, small, white, a trifle uneven, and, though she continued to show them, her laughter ceased. With her red mouth open, she stared. That mouth closed, opened again. She was saying something.</p>
			<p>Everybody was exclaiming. All were hurriedly getting up.</p>
			<p>Paliser turned to Margaret. She had gone.</p>
			<p>Verelst now was between him and her chair. He was bending over. Bending also was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen. On the other side were Cantillon, Ogston and Miss Bleecker.</p>
			<p>Then, as the surprise of it lifted Paliser, he saw that they were lifting her.</p>
			<p>“Brandy!” said Verelst. “Tell the man.”</p>
			<p>“Permit me!” Without officiousness, without noticeable shoves, Paliser got among them and got on his knees beside the girl whom Verelst and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen were supporting.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen wanted to wink at him. Instead, she made way. He took her place, took the girl in his arms and thought he would like to keep her there⁠—though not, of course, forever. But he said: “The other room, perhaps.”</p>
			<p>Margaret’s head was on his shoulder. She raised it. Her eyes had opened. She looked at him, at the arms that were about her. A shudder shook her. Verelst stretched a hand, Ogston another. With them, but otherwise without effort, she stood up.</p>
			<p>Cantillon exclaimed at her. “Right as rain again! I say, Miss Austen, you did give us a start!”</p>
			<p>Yet at once, and so endearingly, with the air of an elder sister, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen resumed the maternal functions. “Dearest child, you have been overdoing it!”</p>
			<p>Kate patted the girl. “Margaret! I nearly fainted too. I was looking at you. You went over like that!”</p>
			<p>“Sorry,” said Margaret evenly. Her hands had gone to the back of her head. She dropped them and added: “If you will excuse me.”</p>
			<p>Lovingly her mother dismissed her. “The smelling-salts! You will find them somewhere.” The lady looked about. “Shall we have coffee in the other room? You men can smoke there if you like, or here if you prefer.”</p>
			<p>It was quite modern. But Verelst was old, therefore old-fashioned. He preferred the dining-room. Already the girls had followed Margaret. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen passed out. Verelst sat down. So also did Cantillon and Ogston. But Paliser, who had nothing to say to them, accompanied <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen.</p>
			<p>“It never happened to her before,” she told him. “Where shall you sit? Here, by me?” In speaking she made room on the sofa and with amiable suspicion eyed him. “You hadn’t said anything to her, had you?”</p>
			<p>Paliser shook his handsome head. “I wanted to.”</p>
			<p>Pleasantly she invited it. “Yes?”</p>
			<p>“I wanted to ask her to marry me.”</p>
			<p>There he was dangling, and what a fish! The dear woman licked her chops, not vulgarly, of course, but mentally.</p>
			<p>Paliser, who knew perfectly well what she was at, smiled tantalisingly. “It is beastly to boast, but I am an epicure.”</p>
			<p>What in the world does he mean? the dear woman wondered. But she said: “Of course you are.”</p>
			<p>Paliser, who was enjoying himself hugely, resumed: “An epicure, you know, postpones the finest pleasures. He does so sometimes because of the enchantment of distance and again because he can’t help himself. That has been my case.”</p>
			<p>It was fully a moment before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen got it. Then she said: “But I told you, didn’t I? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox is dead and buried.”</p>
			<p>It was quick work. Paliser, admiring her agility, laughed. “So recently though! The immortelles have not had time to fade.”</p>
			<p>That would have made a saint swear! Not being a saint, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen contented herself with virtuous surprise. “But there were none! I told you that. I told you that any attraction he may have had for my child, he shocked straight out of her. Not deliberately. Dear me, I would not have you fancy such a thing for a moment. Nor would I misjudge him. I hope I am too conscientious. But such interest as the child had in him⁠—an interest I need hardly say that was girlish and immature⁠—he destroyed.”</p>
			<p>The picture, bold but crude, had its defects. To remedy them, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen applied the brush. “That singing-girl! You know whom I mean. I saw you with her the night we went to the Bazaar.”</p>
			<p>Paliser nodded. He knew indeed! He knew too that, for a moment, he had fancied that Cassy was in love with Lennox. But that idea he had long since abandoned and what she could now be doing in this galley intrigued him.</p>
			<p>With a free hand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen laid on the colours. “You will hardly credit it, but we as good as caught him with her. As good or as bad. It is a matter of taste. For me it was very painful. A woman should be spared such an experience. As for Margaret, while the child certainly did not understand⁠—how could she?⁠—yet, even in her innocence, she realised⁠—well⁠—that he is just what you said.”</p>
			<p>It was a bit thick and Paliser began to laugh.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen saw that he did not believe her. The fact annoyed and in vexation she piled it on. “Afterward, in this very room, I taxed him with it and he admitted it.”</p>
			<p>What a lie! thought Paliser, who specialised in that article. But, a second thought prompting, he wondered whether it were a lie. His knowledge of Cassy refuted it. At the same time, where women are concerned, you never know. One thing, however, he did know. In his quality of expert he knew that there are statements which, whether true or false, may come in handy and, comfortably, he smiled.</p>
			<p>“So that was the reason why the engagement was broken.”</p>
			<p>“What more would you have?” replied the candid creature, who now felt that he had swallowed it.</p>
			<p>Quite as comfortably, Paliser returned to his muttons. “I may cease then to be an epicure?”</p>
			<p>There was the fish again, but how to land him? The glittering fisherlady could not bind and gag the bait and drop her into his mouth. At any such attempt, the bait would pack and go, might even go without packing. Yet there was the fish, eager, willing, the gills awiggle. Barring a few gold-fish in Bradstreet, in Burke and in Lemprière, this fish was the pick of the basket. To see him glide away, and for no other earthly reason than because the bait refused to be hooked, was simply inhuman. Flesh and blood could not stand it. No, nor ingenuity either. Instantly the angler saw that in default of bait, a net may do the trick and, with the ease of a prestidigitateur, she produced one.</p>
			<p>“You have my blessing!”</p>
			<p>Paliser laughed and bowed. He was in it, it was where he wanted to be and he liked it. But in view of existing domestic arrangements, he was in it a bit too soon and, wriggling through a mesh, he stopped laughing and looked solemn.</p>
			<p>“You are very good. But beforehand my father will expect to be consulted and, just at present, that is impossible. The physicians would forbid it.”</p>
			<p>“The poor dear old man! You don’t mean⁠—”</p>
			<p>Paliser half raised a hand. The gesture was slight but expressive. One never knew!</p>
			<p>But so much the better, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen. Pending the delay she could so bombard the bait, bombard her day in, day out, and the whole night through, that, like Liège and Namur, her resistance would crumble, and meanwhile he would come in for everything, or nearly everything, she reflected, and the reflection prompting, she affected concern.</p>
			<p>“Has your sister been informed?”</p>
			<p>“I cabled her to-day,” said Paliser, who had done nothing of the kind.</p>
			<p>With the same concern, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen lied as freely. “It is too sad for words.” But at once the air of the sympathiser departed, replaced by that of the hostess. Through one door the men were entering. Through another came the girls.</p>
			<p>Kate Schermerhorn approached. “Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, Margaret’s all right, but she has a headache.” As she spoke, she threw a glance at Cantillon.</p>
			<p>Poppet Bleecker also approached. “It is too bad, Margaret is such a dear! I would like to stop on but they tell me my maid is here. Thank you so much, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen.”</p>
			<p>The lady stood up. “But you are not all going!” They all were though. She knew it and was glad of it. The object of the dinner was achieved and achievement, however satisfactory, is fatiguing. “You too!” she successively exclaimed at Ogston and Cantillon. “And you also!” she exclaimed at Paliser, to whom, dropping her voice, she added: “If possible, remember me to him.”</p>
			<p>As they went, Verelst surveyed her. He stood against the mantel, his back to the empty grate.</p>
			<p>Turning she saw him. “Well, what now?”</p>
			<p>Verelst, adjusting his glasses, said, and distantly enough: “What now? No, what next?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen sat down. “Peter, if you ever loved me, don’t adopt that tone.”</p>
			<p>“It is not the tone, it is the tune and the tune is yours.”</p>
			<p>“Tune? What tune? What on earth are you talking about?”</p>
			<p>“The tune to which the dinner was set. I heard it. Margaret heard it. It knocked her out.”</p>
			<p>She raised her eyes to him, made them pathetic. “Peter, I haven’t a penny.”</p>
			<p>“You have twenty thousand a year.”</p>
			<p>“Nineteen, not a dollar more, and that is genteel poverty and there’s nothing genteel in poverty now.”</p>
			<p>Verelst tugged at his moustache. “Tell me this. Is she to marry him?”</p>
			<p>In affected surprise, she started. “How you do jump at conclusions.”</p>
			<p>Angrily he nodded. “I appear to have jumped at the correct one.”</p>
			<p>But his anger had gained her. She faced him. “Heavens and earth! What have you against him? What have you all against him? My eyes are as good as any one’s. I can’t see it.”</p>
			<p>“You might feel it then.”</p>
			<p>“Feel what?”</p>
			<p>Verelst tugged again at his moustache. He had never heard of elementals and, if he had heard, he would not have believed in them. He knew nothing of auræ⁠—which photography has captured. He was very old fogy. But he knew an honest man when he saw one and a gentleman before he opened his mouth.</p>
			<p>“Feel what?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen repeated.</p>
			<p>Verelst, thrashing about, could not get it, but he said: “I can’t describe it, but it’s something. His father had it. He⁠—”</p>
			<p>“His father is at death’s door.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! Is he? Well, I’m sorry for that. M. P. used to be no better than the law allows⁠—and the law is very lenient.”</p>
			<p>“You were too.”</p>
			<p>“I daresay. But M. P. has got over it. Without boasting, I think I have also. But that is neither here nor there. In the old days, I have seen people shrink from him.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense! Precious little shrinking I ever did.”</p>
			<p>“Timidity was never one of your many virtues.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be coarse, Peter, and if possible don’t be stupid. If you know anything against Monty, say it I may find it in his favour.”</p>
			<p>Impatiently Verelst motioned. “Decent men avoid him.”</p>
			<p>“And you!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen retorted. “What do you call yourself? You are always civil to him.”</p>
			<p>Verelst showed his teeth. “One of the few things life has taught me is to be civil to everybody.”</p>
			<p>“Except to me. Now do sit down and make yourself uncomfortable. You have made me uncomfortable enough. Any one might think you a country parson.”</p>
			<p>But Verelst, scowling at the dial which the legs of the nymph upheld, removed his glasses. “I am going.” He moved to the door, stopped, half turned, motioned again. “Tell Margaret I would rather see her in her coffin.”</p>
			<p>Angrily she started. “I’ll tell her nothing of the kind.”</p>
			<p>It was his back that she addressed. She saw him go, saw too her anger go with him. The outer door had not closed before the tune of which he had spoken was dispersing it.</p>
			<p>But was it a tune? It seemed something far rarer. In it was a whisper of waters, the lap of waves, the muffled voice of a river, which, winding from hill to sea, was pierced by a note very high, very clear, entirely limpid, a note that had in it the gaiety of a sunbeam, a note that mounted in loops of light, expanding as it mounted, until, bursting into jets of fire, it drew from the stream’s deepest depths the sonority and glare of its riches.</p>
			<p>The ripple of it ran down the spine of this woman, who at heart was a Hun and to whom the harmonies disclosed, not the mythical gleam of the Rheingold, but the real radiance of the Paliser wealth.</p>
			<p>At the glow of it she rubbed her hands.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
