<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>V</h2>
			<p>In Park Avenue that night there was no dramatic father in waiting. There were no bills, no scenes, no thought of secret errands; merely a drawing-room in which a fire was burning and where, presently, Margaret and Lennox were alone.</p>
			<p>“I have letters to write,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen told them.</p>
			<p>She had no letters to write, but she did have a thing or two to consider. What the wolf was to Cassy’s father, Lennox was to her.</p>
			<p>At dinner, Peter Verelst’s advice to do nothing had seemed strategic. At the Splendor, it had seemed stupid. The spectacle of that girl hobnobbing with Lennox had interested her enormously. If a spectacle can drip, that had dripped and with possibilities which, if dim as yet, were none the less providential, particularly when viewed spaciously, in the light of other possibilities which Paliser exhaled. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen was a woman of distinction. You had only to look at her to be aware of it. Yet, at the possible possibilities, she licked her chops.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, with the seriousness of those to whom love is not the sentiment that it once was, or the sensation that it has become, but the dense incarnate mystery that it ever should be, Margaret and Lennox were also occupied with the future.</p>
			<p>In connection with it, Lennox asked: “Can you come to-morrow?”</p>
			<p>As he spoke, Margaret released her hand. Her mother was entering and he stood up.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen,” he resumed, “won’t you and Margaret have tea at my apartment to-morrow?”</p>
			<p>He would have reseated himself but the lady saw to it that he did not.</p>
			<p>“You have such pleasant programmes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox. You are not going though, are you? Well, if you must, good-night.”</p>
			<p>It was boreal, yet, however arctic, it was smiling, debonair. As such, Lennox had no recourse but to accept it. He bent over Margaret’s hand, touched two of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen’s fingers. In a moment, he had gone.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, smiling still, sat down.</p>
			<p>“Nice young man. Very nice. Nice hats, nice ties, nice coats. Then also he is a theosophist, I suppose, or, if not, then by way of becoming one. What more could the heart desire? Would you mind putting out one of those lights? Not that one⁠—the other.”</p>
			<p>Gowned in grey which in spite of its hue contrived to be brilliant, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen rustled ever so slightly. Always a handsome woman and well aware of it, she was of two minds about her daughter’s looks. They far surpassed her own and she did not like that. On the other hand they were an asset on which she counted.</p>
			<p>She rustled, quite as slightly again.</p>
			<p>“And such a taking way with him! That little singing-girl whom we saw to-night, quite a pretty child, didn’t you think? She seemed quite smitten. Then there are others, one may suppose. Yes, certainly, a very nice young man.”</p>
			<p>“Mother!”</p>
			<p>“Well, what? Young men will be young men. Only a theosophist could imagine that they would be young girls. I make every allowance from him⁠—as doubtless he does for others. This is quite as it should be. I have no patience with model young men. Model young men delight their mothers’ hearts and ruin their wives’ temper. They remodel themselves after marriage. Whereas a young man who is not model at all, one who has had his fling beforehand, settles down and becomes quite fat. You have chosen very wisely, my dear. If you had waited you might have had Paliser and I should not have liked that. He is too good.”</p>
			<p>Margaret stretched a hand to the fire. She was not cold and the movement was mechanical. But she made no reply. In Matthew we are told that for every idle word we utter we shall answer at the day of judgment. That passage she had longly meditated. She did not believe that Matthew wrote it and she did not believe in a day of judgment. Matthew was a peasant who spoke Syro-Chaldaic. It was not supposable that he could write in Greek. It was not supposable that there can be a specific day of judgment, since every moment of our days is judged. But through Margaret had her tolerant doubts, she knew that the message itself was sound. It did not condemn evil and vulgar words, for they condemn themselves. What it condemned was idle words and she regretted that her mother employed them. But theosophy is, primarily, a school of good manners. The Gospel condemns idle words, theosophy forbids disagreeable ones.</p>
			<p>To her mother’s remarks, she made therefore no reply. Instead, she changed the subject.</p>
			<p>“Will you care to go with me to his rooms to-morrow?”</p>
			<p>With a mimic of surprise and of gentle remonstrance that was admirably assumed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen lifted a hand.</p>
			<p>“But, my dear! Were you thinking of going alone?”</p>
			<p>The remonstrance, however gentle, was absurd and she knew it. Margaret could go where she liked. It would all be chaste as a piano-recital. But the flea that she had been trying to put in the girl’s ear seemed very ineffective. She is just as I was at her age, thought this lady, who, in so thinking, flattered herself extraordinarily.</p>
			<p>She shook her head. “For if you were, it would not do. Such things may pass in London, they don’t here. But to-morrow is Saturday, isn’t it? Yes, to-morrow is Saturday. At three I have an appointment with the dentist. I’ll telephone though. That always pains them and, where a dentist is concerned, I do think turn about is fair play.”</p>
			<p>It was pleasantly said. To make it pleasanter, she stood up and added: “Are you to sit here and read? There is a French book lying around somewhere that belonged to your dear father. I don’t remember who wrote it and I have forgotten the title, but you are sure to like it. There! I have it. It is called: ‘L’art de tromper les femmes.’ ”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen moved to the door and looked back.</p>
			<p>“But if you don’t find it readily, let it go for to-night. Your young man is sure to have a copy. No nice young man is without one.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
