<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>In the subway, the following evening, Cassy saw a man eyeing her. She turned and saw another man who also was eyeing her. On the seat opposite two women were discussing her clothes.</p>
			<p>The clothes, her own manufacture, were not of the fashion, not behind it, or ahead of it, but above it. A mode, or a mood of her own, they consisted in a blue silk smock and a yellow cloth skirt. On the sleeves and about the neck of the smock there was also yellow, touches of it, with which the skirt married. Therewith she was hatless, rebellious and handsome.</p>
			<p>Accustomed to the inquisitiveness of appraising eyes, she ignored the women as, already, she had ignored the men. With obliterating unconcern, she reduced them to the fluidity of the inchoate. Other matters occupied her, and, primarily, a trick, an extremely shabby one, from which she had not yet recovered.</p>
			<p>The day before, after paying the butcher, the baker, and the punctual and pertinacious agent, she had scaled the walk-up where she found her father with the violin, on which, an hour earlier, Lennox had loaned her the money.</p>
			<p>The spectacle flabbergasted her. Then, realising what Lennox had done, his iniquity struck her as hateful. At once, in an effort to account, however imaginatively, for the apparent sorcery of it all, she tried to invent a fairytale. But the tale would not come. Nor was it needed. Her father dispensed with any. Impatient of detail, as the artist usually is, he required none. The extraordinary perspicacity of the police who had nailed and returned the violin instanter, this wizardry that would have thrown anyone else into stupors of bewilderment, interested him not at all. He had the violin. That sufficed. The rest did not matter.</p>
			<p>It mattered though and monumentally to Cassy. To owe the butcher, the baker, the candlestickmaker, and to have them look slantingly at you, that was disgusting. But to be beholden for a gift, which you had refused to accept, and which then, behind your back, was dumped in on you, that was degrading. Consequently, while conjecturing new versions of Perrault, versions which it relieved her to find were not wanted, she gnashed her milk-white teeth at Lennox, felt that she hated him, yet felt, too, and the feeling was maddening, that the hatred was very tender.</p>
			<p>All this was irritating enough and the Tamburini had contrived to add to the irritation. It had been arranged that the fallen star was to come to the walk-up and accompany Cassy to the Splendor. Instead of which, at the last moment, the ex-diva had telephoned that she would join her at the hotel, and Cassy foresaw a tedious sitting about in the lobby, for Ma Tamby was always late. But when have misfortunes come singly? Cassy foresaw, too, that the tedium would not be attenuated by Paliser’s conversation.</p>
			<p>It was not for that, or for him, that she was then in the subway, but for dinner. Young, healthy and consequently carnal, though not otherwise carnal than hunger can make you, she liked food, on condition that she had not prepared it, and⁠—in particular, and why not?⁠—she liked the savorously truffled menus that walk-ups lack. She had another reason for being in the subway, one that Ma Tamby had lodged, like a flea, in her ear.</p>
			<p>But now, near the heart of Manhattan, the train had stopped. Cassy got out, looked at her white gloves, wondered if they smelled of benzine, decided that they did, took them off and went on to the Splendor where Paliser was waiting.</p>
			<p>Other people appeared to be similarly occupied. In the high, wide hall were groups of careful men and careless women, the latter very scrumptious in their imported frocks. The sight of these Parisianisms abashed Cassy no more than her appearance abashed Paliser. Etiquette, Formality, the Proper Thing, the great inane gods of the antebellum heavens, he had never acknowledged and now, though locally their altars remained and their worship persisted, he knew they were forever dead, blown into the dustbin of the things that were, tossed there in derision by that atheist, the War.</p>
			<p>The careless women looked at Cassy and carefully looked away. The careful men looked at her and carelessly looked again. In the severity of the wide, high hall, the girl with her rebellious beauty and harlequin gown, struck a note which it lacked, struck two of them, the go-and-be-hanged-to-you and originality.</p>
			<p>In evening clothes that said Savile Row, Paliser approached. “You are punctual as a comet and equally luminous.”</p>
			<p>Cassy, ignoring the remark, ignoring, too, the hand that accompanied it, cut him short. “Haven’t seen Madame Tamburini, have you?”</p>
			<p>Paliser’s hair had the effect of a mirror. He smoothed the back of it. The ex-diva he had certainly seen and not later than just before she telephoned to Cassy. But it is injudicious, and also tiresome, to tell everything. With the wave of a cheque, the complicity of the former first-lady had been assured, and assured moreover without a qualm on her part. Ma Tamby did not know what it is to have a qualm⁠—which she could not have spelled if she had known. She was differently and superiorly educated. In the university that life is, she had acquired encyclopedias of recondite learning. She knew that ice is not all that it is cracked up to be: that a finger in the pie is better than two in the fire, and that angels have been observed elsewhere than at Mons⁠—learning which, as you may see, is surprising.</p>
			<p>Over the ham and eggs of an earlier evening, the syllables of Paliser’s name had awakened echoes of old Academy nights and Mapleson’s “grand revivals” of the Trovatore, echoes thin and quavering, yet still repeating hymns in glory of the man’s angelic papa. On the way from ham and eggs to Harlem, she had, in consequence, conjured, for Cassy’s benefit, with performing fleas. But when, on this afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> <abbr>jr.</abbr>, had come and waved cheques at her, she had felt that her worst hopes were realised, that her finger was really in the pie, and she had agreed to everything, which, however, for the moment, was nothing at all, merely to abandon Cassy that evening; merely also to collaborate later in the evocation of a myth, and meanwhile to keep at it with the fleas.</p>
			<p>Now, in the hall of the Splendor, as Paliser patted the back of his head, he was enjoying Cassy’s open-air appearance that needed only a tennis-racket to be complete.</p>
			<p>Cassy glanced about. She had a penny or two more than her carfare and yet, if she had owned the shop, she could not have appeared more at ease in this smartest of smart inns, a part of which, destiny, in its capriciousness, was to offer her.</p>
			<p>“No,” he answered. “But I have a private room somewhere. She can find her way there, unless you prefer palms and an orchestra.”</p>
			<p>“I do,” said Cassy, to whom a room with this man said only boredom and who liked to see what was going on.</p>
			<p>Then when, presently, they were seated at a table, to which the chastened captain of the ham-and-egg night had piloted the way, Cassy beheld what she had never beheld before, and what few mortals ever do behold, a cradled bottle of Clos de Vougeot. But to her, the royal crû was very much like the private room. It said nothing. A neighbouring table was more eloquent.</p>
			<p>Among the people seated there was an imperial woman with an imperial manner, whom Cassy instantly recognised. She was prima donna, prima donna assoluta, and though Cassy did not know it⁠—nor would it have interested her if she had known⁠—dissoluta also.</p>
			<p>To be in her shoes!</p>
			<p>In that seven-leagued dream, she forgot Paliser, the delinquent Tamburini, the trick that Lennox had played. In a golden gloom, on a wide stage, to a house packed to the roof, Cassy was bowing. Her final roulade had just floated on and beyond, lost now in cyclonic bravas.</p>
			<p>“It was the Duc d’Aumale,” Paliser was saying.</p>
			<p>“Eh?” Abruptly Cassy awoke.</p>
			<p>“Or, if not, some other chap who, recognising it, ordered his regiment to halt and present arms.”</p>
			<p>“To whom?”</p>
			<p>“To the vineyard where the grape in that bottle was grown.”</p>
			<p>Cassy shook out a napkin. “You talk just like my janitress. I never understand a word she says.”</p>
			<p>But now a waiter was bringing delicacies other than those obtainable in Harlem; in particular, a dish that had the merit of pleasing Cassy.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Muskrat.”</p>
			<p>“What!”</p>
			<p>“Muskrat with terrapin for a pseudonym. The pseudonym shows imagination. Let us be thankful for that. Gastronomy is bankrupt. Formerly it was worshipped. Formerly gastronomy was a goddess. Today the sole tributes consist in bills-of-fare that are just like the Sahara minus the oases. It is the oases we want and it is muskrat we get. That is all wrong. The degree of culture that any nation may claim is shown in its cookery and if there is anything viler than what we get here it must be served in Berlin. It must have been Solon who said: ‘Tell me what you eat and I will tell you who you are.’ He added, or should have, that animals feed, man dines and, when permitted, dines devoutly. There are dishes, as there are wines, to which one should rise and bow. But hereabouts it is only by special dispensation that one gets them. In a hotel such as this there is an outward show of reverence, but it is sheer hypocrisy; of real piety there is none, a sham attempt to observe the sacred rites without knowing how. I admit I don’t know either. From me the divine afflatus has been withheld. But elsewhere I have been conscious of the presence. Once or twice I was blessed. Here, though, in default of shrines there should be chairs. Harvard, Yale, Columbia, should establish a few. When I was in college I was taught everything that it is easiest to forget. If the youth of the land were instructed in gastronomy we would all be wiser and better. Chairs on gastronomy, that is what we need!”</p>
			<p>Cassy laughed. “Why not tables?”</p>
			<p>Paliser laughed with her. The laughter was a bond. It joined them however tenuously. It was what he had been driving at. Accustomed to easy successes, Cassy’s atmosphere, with its flavour of standoffishness and indifference, appealed to this man, who had supped on the facile and who wanted the difficult. Cassy, he could have sworn, would supply it and, if he had, he would have sworn very truly.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the muskrat had gone. Dishes less false but equally fair had followed. Now, with the air of a conjurer, the waiter just showed them an entremets which he hastened to serve. It was a soufflée.</p>
			<p>At it, Cassy, just showing the point of her strawberry tongue, exclaimed without rancour: “Ma Tamby has thrown us over.”</p>
			<p>Paliser lit a cigarette. “She may be singing in the private room.”</p>
			<p>Cassy laughed again. “Yes. ‘<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Una voce poco fa!</span>’ That would be just the thing⁠—wouldn’t it?⁠—to sing privately in private.”</p>
			<p>Paliser answered, though what, she did not hear. The orchestra drowned it and for a moment she considered him, conscious that he was less objectionable than he had seemed, yet entirely unconscious that such objection as she had experienced was due to his extreme good-looks, which in a man are always objectionable to a woman when she herself is handsome, for they make him resemble her and, in so doing, constitute an encroachment on her prerogatives, which, in itself, is an affront.</p>
			<p>Cassy, ignorant of the psychology of it, equally unaware that familiarity which may breed contempt can also dissolve dislike, and feeling merely a lessening of her instinctive hostility, told herself that he was perhaps not as cocky as he looked and drank of the glass before her.</p>
			<p>The Clos de Vougeot which, to the educated palate, is art, literature and song combined, meant nothing more to her than if it had been Médoc. She drank it because it was there at her hand, as she would have drunk water, without savouring it, without any realisation of the enormity of the crime. Yet though it meant nothing, nothing at least of which she was aware, the royal crû was affecting her. It modified and mollified, admonishing her that this man was an inoffensive insect who, circumstances favouring, might, as Ma Tamby when inserting the flea had told her, put her father on his feet.</p>
			<p>In just what the favouring circumstances could consist, the fallen star had not bothered to indicate, and she had not bothered because they were too obvious and also because she was sure that Cassy was not insane.</p>
			<p>Paliser abandoned his cigarette. “If you like, we might look in at the Metropolitan. I believe I have a box.”</p>
			<p>Apart from downstage and the centre of it, apart, too, from the flys and the dressing-rooms, Cassy’s imagination had not as yet conceived anything more beckoning than a box at the opera, even though, as on this occasion, the opera happened to be a concert. “Why, yes. Only⁠—” Pausing, she looked about. The imperial lady had gone.</p>
			<p>“Only what?” Paliser very needlessly asked for he knew.</p>
			<p>“I fear I am a bit overdressed.”</p>
			<p>“Not for Sunday. The house will be full and nobody in it. Besides, what do you care?”</p>
			<p>Cassy shrugged. “Personally, not a rap. It was of you I was thinking.”</p>
			<p>Paliser, who had been signing the check and feeing the waiter, looked at her. “I did not know that you were so considerate.”</p>
			<p>Cassy, in surprise not at him, but at herself, laughed. “Nor did I.”</p>
			<p>Paliser stood up and drew back her chair. “Be careful. You might become cynical. It is in thinking of others that cynicism begins.”</p>
			<p>The platitude slipped from him absently. He had no wish for the concert, no wish to hear Berlinese trulls and bubonic bassi bleat. But, for the tolerably delicate enterprise that he had in hand, there were the preliminary steps which could only be hastened slowly and anything slower than the Metropolitan on a Sunday night, it was beyond him to conjecture.</p>
			<p>But though on that evening a basso did bleat, it may be that he was not bubonic. Moreover he was followed by a soprano who, whether trullish or not, at any rate was not Berlinese and whose voice had the lusciousness of a Hawaiian pineapple. But the selections, which were derived from old Italian cupboards, displeased Paliser, who called them painted mush.</p>
			<p>But not twice! Cassy turned her back on him. The painted mush shook stars in her ears, opened vistas on the beyond. Save for him she would have been quite happy. But his remark annoyed her. It caused her to revise her opinion. Instead of an inoffensive insect he was an offensive fool. None the less, as the concert progressed, she revised it again. On entering the box she had seen his name on the door. The memory of that, filtering through the tinted polenta from the ancient cupboards, softened her. A man so gifted could express all the imbecilities he liked. Elle s’enfichait.</p>
			<p>As a result, before it was over, in lieu of her back, she gave him the seduction of her smile, and, later when, in his car, on the way to the walk-up, he spoke of future dinners, fresher songs, she had so far forgotten the painted mush insult, that momentarily she foresaw but one objection. She had nothing to wear and frankly, with entire unconcern, she out with it.</p>
			<p>For that he had a solution which he kept to himself. The promptly obliterating stare with which she would have reduced him to nonexistence, he dodged in advance.</p>
			<p>Apparently changing the subject, he said: “You know⁠—or know of⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Never heard of her,” said Cassy, entirely unaware that no one else ever had either.</p>
			<p>“She was at the Bazaar the other night and admired your singing.”</p>
			<p>“Very good of her I am sure,” replied Cassy, who, a born anarchist and by the same token a born autocrat, loathed condescension.</p>
			<p>Paliser corrected it. “No, not good⁠—appreciative. She wants you to sing at her house. If you are willing, could she arrange about it through Madame Tamburini?”</p>
			<p>“If she tried very hard, I suppose she might,” Cassy, with the same loftiness, answered.</p>
			<p>But the loftiness was as unreal as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish. Inwardly she jubilated, wondering how much she would get. A hundred? In that case she could repay Lennox at once. At the thought of it, again she revised her opinion. Paliser was young and in her judgment all young men were insects. On the other hand he was serviceable. Moreover, though he looked cocky, he did not presume. He talked rot, but he did not argue. Then, too, his car was a relief.</p>
			<p>But now the car, after bolting through the Park and flying along the Riverside, had swerved. It was mounting the upper reaches of the longest highway on the planet. There it swerved again. From Broadway it barked loudly into a side-street where easily, with a soapy slide, it stopped.</p>
			<p>Paliser got out, preceded Cassy to the steps of the walk-up and smiled in her face. “When?”</p>
			<p>Cassy, the revised opinion of him about her, gave him her hand. “Ask the telephone.”</p>
			<p>The hall took her. She was scaling the stairs. On the way <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish accompanied her. She wished she could tell her father. Yet, if she told him, how could she account for what she did with the money? And would it be a hundred? Perhaps fifty, perhaps less.</p>
			<p>But Paliser saw to it that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish behaved properly. On the morrow Ma Tamby dumped in Cassy’s astonished lap two hundred and fifty⁠—less ten percent, business is business⁠—for samples of the bel canto which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish was not to hear, and for an excellent reason, there was no such person.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
