<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
			<p>Already over the picked-up codfish, flapjacks, Hamburg steaks and cognate enticements on which the Bronx and Harlem breakfasts, the news of it had buttered the toast, flavoured the coffee, added a sweetness to this April day and provided a cocktail to people who did not know Paliser from the Pierrot in the moon. That he was spectacularly wealthy was a tid-bit, that he had been killed at the Metropolitan was a delight, the war news was nothing to the fact that the party with the stiletto had escaped “unbeknownst.” These people were unacquainted with Paliser. But here was a young man with an opera-box of his own, and think of that! Here was the mythological monster that the Knickerbocker has become. Here was the heir to unearned and untold increments. These attributes made him as delectable to the majority who did not know him, as he had become to the privileged few who did.</p>
			<p>Elsewhere, and particularly in and about fashion’s final citadel which the Plaza is, solemn imbeciles viewed the matter vehemently. “Young Paliser! Why, there is no better blood in town! By Jove, I believe we are related!”</p>
			<p>Or else: “That’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr>’s son, isn’t it? Yes, here it is. I never met the old cock but I heard of him long before we came East. A damned outrage, that’s what I call it.”</p>
			<p>Or again: “Dear me, what is the world coming to? What a blessing it is we were not there. They might have come and murdered us all!”</p>
			<p>Adjacently, in clubland, old men with one foot in the grave and the other on Broadway, exchanged reminiscences of the nights when social New York was a small and early family party and <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> led the ball, and at a pace so klinking that he danced beyond the favours of the cotillon⁠—the german as it, the cotillon, was then lovingly called⁠—into assemblies, certainly less select, but certainly, too, more gay, and had horrified scrumptious sedateness with the uproar of his orgies.</p>
			<p>The indicated obituaries followed. “Well, at any rate, they didn’t murder him for it.” “The son now, a chip of the old block, eh?” “Nothing of the kind, a quiet young prig.” “The papers say⁠—” “Damn the papers, they never know anything.” “You mean they don’t print what they do know.” “I mean they don’t give us the woman. For it was a woman. I’ll eat my hat it was a woman.” “Let’s have lunch instead.”</p>
			<p>Generally, for the moment, that was the verdict, one in which the police had already collaborated. But what woman? And, assuming the woman, whence had she come? Where had she gone?⁠—problems, momentarily insoluble but which investigations, then in progress, would probably decide.</p>
			<p>At the great white house on upper Fifth Avenue, the servants knew only that they knew nothing. Nothing at all. Already coached, they were sure and unshakable in their knowledge of that. A <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harvey⁠—from Headquarters⁠—could not budge them an inch. Not one!</p>
			<p>The night before, at the first intelligence of it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> came nearer to giving up the ghost than is commonly advisable. Suffocation seized him. An incubus within was pushing his life-springs out. So can emotion and an impaired digestion affect a father. The emotion was not caused by grief. It was fear. For weeks, for months, during the tedium and terror of the trial, his name, Paliser, would top the page! It had topped it before, very often, but that was years ago. Then he had not cared. Then the wine of youth still bubbled. No, he had not cared. But that was long ago. Since then the wine of youth had gone, spilled in those orgies which he had survived, yet, in the survival, abandoned more and more to solitude and making him seek, what the solitary ever do seek, inconspicuousness. For years he had courted obscurity as imbeciles court fame. And now!</p>
			<p>If only the boy had had the decency to die of pneumonia!</p>
			<p>It was then the incubus gripped him. For a second he saw the visage, infinitely consoling, that Death can display and possibly, but for an immediate drug, there too would have echoed the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Terra addio</span>!”</p>
			<p>He was then in white velvet. A preparation of menthe, dripping from a phial, spotted it green. He did not notice. At the moment the spasm had him. Then as that clicked and passed, he looked in the expressionless face of the butler who had told him.</p>
			<p>The spasm had shaken him into a chair.</p>
			<p>The room, an oblong, was furnished after a fashion of long ago. The daised bed was ascended by low, wide steps. Beyond stood a table of lapis-lazuli. A mantel of the same material was surmounted by a mirror framed in jasper. Beneath the mirror, a fire burned dimly. The lights too were dim. They were diffused by tall wax candles that stood shaded in high gold sticks. On the table there were three of them.</p>
			<p>The chair was near this table, at which <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> had been occupied very laboriously, in doing nothing, a task that he performed in preparation for the bed, which was always ready for him, and for sleep, which seldom was. There he had been told. It had shaken him to his feet, shaken apoplexy at him and shaken him back in the chair.</p>
			<p>Now, as he looked at the servant’s wooden mask, for a moment he relived an age, not a pleasant one either and of which this blow, had he known it, was perhaps the karma. He did not know it. He knew nothing of karma. None the less, with that curious intuition which the great crises induce, he too divined the woman and wished to God that he had kept his hands off, wished that he had not interfered and told Monty to put her in a flat and be damned to her! It was she, he could have sworn it. At once, precisely as he wished he had let her alone, he hoped and quite as fervently that she had covered her tracks, that there would be no trial, nothing but inept conjectures and that forgetfulness in which all things, good and bad, lose their way.</p>
			<p>The futility of wishing passed. The time for action had come. He motioned. “Is Benny here?”</p>
			<p>“He left this noon, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Did he say anything?”</p>
			<p>The butler did not know whether to lie or not, but seeing no personal advantage in either course, he hedged. “Very little, sir.”</p>
			<p>That little, the old man weighed. A little is often enough. It may be too much.</p>
			<p>“He spoke about a girl, eh?”</p>
			<p>“He said a lady was stopping there. Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“What else?”</p>
			<p>The butler shuffled. “He said she was very pretty, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Go on, Canlon.”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, it seems there was a joke about it. The young lady thought she was married.”</p>
			<p>“How was that?”</p>
			<p>“I’m not supposed to know, sir. But from what was let on, Benny was rigged out as a dominie and it made ’em laugh.”</p>
			<p>The old man ran his head out like a turtle. “Damnation, what has that to do with it?”</p>
			<p>“Why, sir, he pretended to marry her.”</p>
			<p>“Benny did?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“He pretended that she was his wife.”</p>
			<p>“No, sir, he pretended to marry her to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Monty.”</p>
			<p>“Good God!” the old man muttered and sank back. The blackness was blacker than any black he had entered. In days gone by, he had agreeably shocked New York with the splendid uproar of his orgies. He had left undone those things which he ought to have done and done those things which he should have avoided. He had been whatever you like⁠—or dislike⁠—but never had he been dishonest. Little that would avail him now. If this turpitude were published, it would be said that he had fathered it. At the prospect, he felt the incubus returning. In a moment it would have him and, spillingly, he drank the green drug.</p>
			<p>The agony receded, but the nightmare confronted him. He grappled with it.</p>
			<p>“The coat I had on at dinner. There is a card-case in the pocket. Give it to me.”</p>
			<p>Probably it was all very useless. Probably no matter what he contrived, the police would ferret her out. There was just one chance though which, properly taken, might save the situation.</p>
			<p>The card-case, pale damask, lined with pale silk, the man brought him. He put it on the table.</p>
			<p>“Canlon!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Benny said nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Very good, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I have a few hundred for you here, between eight and nine, I think.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow there will be more.”</p>
			<p>“I am sure I am very grateful, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t interrupt me. Recently my son returned from Cuba. Occasionally he went visiting. Where he went, he did not tell you. That is all you know. You know nothing else. You heard nothing. Nobody here heard anything. Nobody, in this house, knows anything at all. You understand?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Then see to it. The police will come. You must be at the door. You know now what to say. They will want a word with me. I am too prostrated to see anybody.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Telephone to the Place. Get Benny. Repeat my orders. Say I will do as well by him as I shall by you.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Take the money. You may have the case also.”</p>
			<p>“I thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Tell Peters to fetch me some brandy. The 1810. That will do.”</p>
			<p>Presently, when the police did come and, several hours later, in the person of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harvey, came again, they came upon the barriers, invisible and unscalable, which ignorance, properly paid, can erect. With an empty bag, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harvey made off; not far, however, a few squares below to the Athenæum Club.</p>
			<p>There, the hall-porter succeeded in being magnificent The strange and early visitor he rebuked. It was not customary for members to be murdered!</p>
			<p>A badge, carelessly disclosed, disconcerted him. For a second only. However unusual a member might be, no information could be supplied concerning him. There was another rule, equally strict. Strangers were not admitted. Though, whether the rule applied to a bull, he was uncertain. Momentarily, the hall-porter, previously magnificent, became an unhappy man. Misery is fertile. A compromise surprised him.</p>
			<p>He crooked a thumb. “Here! Go ’round by the back way and ask for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson⁠—he’s one of the captains.”</p>
			<p>From the steps, in the slanting rays of the morning sun, he saw him off. But the gaiety of the eager rays that charged the air with little gold motes, did not cheer him. The lustre of his office was tarnished. A member had been murdered! It was most unusual.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, down the area steps, a hostile and hasty youth in shirt-sleeves and a slashed waistcoat barred the way. The barring was brief. The badge and a smile demolished it. Within, beneath a low ceiling, at a long table, other youths, equally slashed but less hostile, were at breakfast.</p>
			<p>Affably, the intruder raised a hand. “Gentlemen, don’t let me disturb you. I’m just having a look-in on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson did not breakfast with slashed young men; it would have been subversive to discipline, and it was negligently, through a lateral entrance, that presently he appeared. In evening clothes on this early morning, he surveyed his visitor, a big fellow with a slight moustache, an easy way and a missing front tooth, who went straight at it.</p>
			<p>“Pleased to meet you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson. My name’s Harvey. It’s about young Paliser. There may be something in it for you. I’m from Headquarters.”</p>
			<p>The captain coughed. “It’s awful. I can’t tell you anything though. He wasn’t here often. Doubt if I’ve seen him in a week.” He looked about. The slashed youths were edging up. “Come in here.”</p>
			<p>In an adjoining room, he took a chair, waved politely at another, coughed again and resumed. “You say there may be something in it for me?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harvey sat down. “Cert. There’ll be a reward⁠—a big one.”</p>
			<p>The captain turned it over. “It is as much as my place is worth, but last evening one of the members was talking fierce about him.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, so I heard,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harvey, who had heard nothing of the kind and who, not for an instant, had expected to tumble on a fierce-talking member. “I heard his name too. It’s⁠—er⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Lennox,” the captain put in.</p>
			<p>“Lennox, yes, that’s it, and just to see how my account tallies with yours, what did he say?”</p>
			<p>“He said he’d do for him. I could have laughed.”</p>
			<p>“It was funny, I laughed myself, and about a woman, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. But he was engaged to be married. I saw it in the papers.”</p>
			<p>“And this young Paliser butted in?”</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t say. But he threw up his business and sat around and last night he was going to do for him.”</p>
			<p>“At the opera?”</p>
			<p>“He was talking random-like. He had just had a B. and S. I didn’t hear anything about the opera. He wasn’t got up for it. Just a business suit. But, Lord bless you, he didn’t do it. He isn’t that kind. Nice, free-handed feller.”</p>
			<p>“No, of course not. I wouldn’t believe it, not if you told me so. Let me see. Where did I hear he lives?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t rightly know. Somewhere in the neighbourhood.”</p>
			<p>“So I thought and his first name is?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve forgotten. Hold on! Keith! That’s it. Keith Lennox. Are you going to see him? P’raps he can set you straight.”</p>
			<p>“P’raps he can.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t let on about me, my friend.”</p>
			<p>“Not on your life,” replied his friend, who added: “Where’s your hat?”</p>
			<p>“My hat!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Johnson surprisedly exclaimed.</p>
			<p>Affably that friend of his nodded. “Ever been to Headquarters? Well, you’re going there now!”</p>
			<p>Then, presently, the captain and his friend ascended a stairway, down which, a few hours later, hoarse voices came.</p>
			<p>“Extra! Extra!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
