<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
			<p>Harris, wrinkled as a sweetbread and thin as an umbrella, blinked at Cassy. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox is out, mem.”</p>
			<p>“Then go and fetch him.”</p>
			<p>Past the servant, Cassy forced her way through the vestibule, into the sitting-room, where the usual gloom abided, but where, unusually, were a smell of camphor, two overcoats, two trunks and a bag.</p>
			<p>Cassy, putting down the bundle, exclaimed at them. “He is not leaving town?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, mem, tomorrow morning, for Mineola.” He spoke grudgingly, looking as he spoke like a little old mule at bay.</p>
			<p>Cassy, noticing that, said: “See here, I don’t mean to bully you, but it is most important that I should see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox⁠—important for him, do you hear?”</p>
			<p>“I hear you, mem, but I don’t know where he is.”</p>
			<p>“Then find out. There must be a telephone.”</p>
			<p>Harris scratched his head but otherwise he did nothing.</p>
			<p>“Come!” Cassy told him. “Hurry!”</p>
			<p>Harris shifted. “I don’t know as how he’d like it. He’s been that upset these last few days. I⁠—” He hesitated. Visibly an idea had visited him with which he was grappling. “You’re not from Miss Austen, now, are you?”</p>
			<p>Cassy caught at it. To confirm it would be fanciful. To deny it would be extravagant. Choosing an in-between for the benefit of this servant whom she knew to be English, she produced it.</p>
			<p>“I am the Viscountess of Casa-Evora.”</p>
			<p>Harris wiped his mouth. A viscountess who had come only the other day with a bundle, and who now forced her way in with another bundle, did not coincide with such knowledge as he had of the nobility. But she was certainly overbearing enough to be anybody.</p>
			<p>He turned. “Very good, your ladyship, I’ll telephone.”</p>
			<p>Don’t ladyship me, Cassy was about to reply, but judging that impolitic, she sat down.</p>
			<p>On the train in she had debated whether she would go first to Harlem or to Lennox and in either case what afterward she should do. She had a few dollars which her father would need. The thought of these assets reminded her that in changing her clothes she had omitted to change back into her own stockings. Well, when she changed again she would return the pair which she had on and, as she determined on that, she saw Paliser’s face as she had seen it when she threw the vase. That relapse into the primitive shamed her. She had behaved like a fishwife. But though she regretted the violence, she regretted even more deeply the vase. The destruction of art is so despicably Hun! For moxa, she evoked the Grantly masquerade.</p>
			<p>The entire lack of art in that seemed to her incongruous with the surface Paliser whom she had known. But had she even known the surface which itself was a mask? Yet behind the mask was an intelligence which at least was not ordinary, yet which, none the less, had descended to that! She could not understand it. She could not understand, what someone later explained to her, that a high order of intellect does not of itself prevent a man from soiling it and, with it, himself and his hands. The explanation came later, when other matters were occupying her and when Paliser, headlined in the papers, was dead.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the train had landed her in the Grand Central and she decided to go to Lennox first.</p>
			<p>Now as she sat in his sitting-room where, for all she knew, she might have to sit for hours, it comforted her to think that she had so decided. If she had put it off until the morrow, Lennox would, by then, have gone to the aviation-field, where he might be killed before she could patch things up. At thought of that, she wondered whether he might not stay out undiscoverably all night and send for his things to be fetched to the station.</p>
			<p>But in that case, Cassy promptly reflected, I’ll go to her, pull her out of bed, drag her there⁠—and no thanks either. I didn’t do it for you, I did it for him. He’s too good for you.</p>
			<p>On the mantel, a clock struck, while thinly, through a lateral entrance, Harris emerged.</p>
			<p>“The hall-porter at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox’ club says he’s just gone out with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones. Yes, ma’am.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones! What <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones? The novelist?”</p>
			<p>“I’m thinking so, ma’am. A very haffable gentleman.”</p>
			<p>“Try to get him. Ask if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox is there. Or, no, I’ll do the talking.”</p>
			<p>Then presently she was doing it, collaborating rather in the dialogue that ensued.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, darling.”</p>
			<p>Cassy, swallowing it, resumed: “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, forgive a stranger for intruding, I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Beautiful voice, forgive me. Triple brute that I am, I thought it was my aunt.”</p>
			<p>“Then let me introduce myself. This is Miss Cara.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="it">Casta diva!</i> You do me infinite honour!”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, I must see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox. It is a matter of life and death.”</p>
			<p>“Lennox is engaged with death now.”</p>
			<p>“What!”</p>
			<p>“He is preparing for the great adventure. At this moment he is making his will. Miss Cara?”</p>
			<p>“Yes?”</p>
			<p>“Lennox takes even serious matters gravely.”</p>
			<p>“But he is with you?”</p>
			<p>“In my workshop and at your service as I am.”</p>
			<p>“You will let me come there?”</p>
			<p>“Enthusiastically and yet with all humility for I have no red carpet to run down the stair.”</p>
			<p>“Then hold on to him, please.”</p>
			<p>Ouf! sighed Cassy, as she hung it up. Another man who might be <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Yallum’s husband! She took the telephone-book, found and memorised the address and turned to Harris. “Thank you very much. Will you mind giving me that package?”</p>
			<p>“Beg pardon, ma’am,” the little man said, as he opened the door for her. “There’s nothing more amiss, is there?”</p>
			<p>Cassy covered him with her lovely eyes. “When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox comes back here, he may tell you to unpack.”</p>
			<p>“Then may God bless your ladyship.”</p>
			<p>Cassy went on.</p>
			<p>At Jones’ shop, a floor in a reconstructed private house, a man who had the air of performing a feat, showed her into a room that was summarily, but not spartanly, furnished. On one side was a bookcase supported by caryatides. Above, hung a stretch of silk on which was a flight of dragons. Above the silk was an ivory mask. Fronting the bookcase was the biggest table that Cassy had ever seen.</p>
			<p>Jones, vacating the table, advanced to greet her. Perched on his shoulder, was a cat that peered at her. It had long hair, the colour of smoke; a bushy tail; the eyes of an angel and a ferocious moustache.</p>
			<p>Although Cassy had other matters in hand, she exclaimed at it. “What a duck!”</p>
			<p>Jones, who saw, and at once, that she had not come to ask the time of day, exclaimed also: “Yes, but ducky is as ducky does. That cat talks in her sleep.”</p>
			<p>But now Lennox, advancing too, had taken her hand.</p>
			<p>Withdrawing it, she put the bundle on the table, on which were papers, and, noticeably, a dagger, brilliant, wicked, thin as a shadow. On the blade was a promise⁠—Penetrabo.</p>
			<p>She looked up. Jones and the cat had gone. She looked at Lennox. “I don’t know where to begin.”</p>
			<p>Lennox could not tell her. On learning that she wanted to see him, he had supposed it was about her father and he had said as much to Jones. But in greeting her, the novelist knew from her vibrations that whatever her object might be, at least it was not ordinary. Then, taking the cat, he had gone.</p>
			<p>Now, though, Cassy was at it. “The day you loaned me a hundred, you remember? As I went out I had the money in my hand. In the hall was Miss Austen. You had just shown me her picture. I recognised her at once. With her was a woman, thin-faced, thin-lipped, thin-minded. She saw me, saw the money, gave me a look. I did not forget it. But it is only today that I learned what it meant. It meant that I am no better than I ought to be⁠—or you either.”</p>
			<p>Lennox had one hand on the table. He raised the other. “Who told you this?”</p>
			<p>“Paliser. He said it was the reason your engagement was broken.”</p>
			<p>In the palm of the upraised hand, the fingers moved forward and back, regularly, methodically, mechanically. Lennox was unaware of it. He was unaware of anything except the monstrous perversity of the tale.</p>
			<p>“I came directly from him to your rooms. Your man said you were going away. Thank goodness, I am not too late.”</p>
			<p>Cassy had seated herself, but now, reaching for the bundle, she stood up. Across the street, in the house opposite, a boy was lowering a shade. It seemed to Cassy that she had raised one. But there are explanations that explain nothing. To Lennox there was a shade suspended before Margaret, who had judged him unheard. It obscured her. He could not see her at all.</p>
			<p>Over the way, the boy lowered a second shade and Cassy, as though prompted by it, raised another. “Paliser said you admitted it.”</p>
			<p>From the obscurity Lennox turned, but it was still about him. “Admitted what?”</p>
			<p>Cassy reddened. “What I told you.”</p>
			<p>With the movement of the head that a bull has when he is going for you, Lennox bent his own. The movement, which was involuntary, was momentary. The shade had lifted. He saw Margaret, but behind her he saw others holding her back, telling her he was not fit to be spoken to. He was going for them. Meanwhile he had forgotten Cassy. He looked up, saw her, remembered the part attributed to her in the story and struck the table.</p>
			<p>“It is damnable that such a thing should be said of you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” Cassy put in. “It was not at all on my account that I told you. I⁠—” She stopped short. The promised horsewhipping occurred to her.</p>
			<p>Lennox took up the knife, gave it a turn, shoved it away. It was very much as though he had twisted it in somebody’s gizzards. The idea had come to him that Paliser had concocted the admission. But, as he was unable to conceive what his object could be, he dismissed it. None the less, for what the man had said, he deserved to be booted down the club steps.</p>
			<p>Cassy had stopped short. The story behind the story did not concern Lennox, yet as he might wonder how Paliser had ventured with her on such a subject, she began at it again.</p>
			<p>“We were married recently, or anyway I thought so. Today I discovered that the ceremony was bogus. Then I told him a thing or two and he told me that.”</p>
			<p>Lennox stared. Angry already, angry ever since the rupture, angry with that intensity of anger which only those who love⁠—or who think they do⁠—and who are thwarted in it ever know, and all the angrier because he had no one and could have no one to vent it on, until he got to the front and got at the Huns, at that last fillip from Cassy he saw someone on whom he could vent it, and yet to whom none the less he felt strangely grateful. For, whatever Paliser had done or omitted, at any rate, he had completely clarified the situation.</p>
			<p>“I must run,” said Cassy. “But you can tell Miss Austen, can’t you?”</p>
			<p>Lennox, controlling himself, motioned. “Would you mind repeating this to Jones?”</p>
			<p>Cassy’s eyebrows arched themselves. “It was hard enough to tell you. Were it not for your engagement, I wouldn’t have said anything. When dreadful things happen to a girl, people always think that she must be dreadful herself. Isn’t that nice of them? I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“See here,” Lennox interrupted, “you can’t leave it like this. Something has got to be done. I can give Paliser a hiding and I will. But that isn’t enough. I don’t know whether a criminal action will lie, but I do know that you can get damages and heavy ones.”</p>
			<p>Cassy’s lovely eyes searched the room. “Who was that speaking? It wasn’t you, was it?”</p>
			<p>Lennox, recognising the rebuke, acknowledged it. “Forgive me. I forgot whom I was addressing. Jones will be less stupid. Let us have him in.”</p>
			<p>But when Jones, immediately requisitioned, appeared, Cassy again putting down her bundle, protested. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox regards me as an Ariadne and expects me to act like a young lady in a department-store. Either role is too upstage.”</p>
			<p>Jones, taken with her mobile mouth, her lovely eyes, the oval of her handsome face, said lightly: “It seems to me that you might assume any part.”</p>
			<p>Lennox struck out. “Paliser hocuspocused her with a fake marriage. He⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” Cassy gently put in, “I have no one to blame but myself. I ought to have known better.”</p>
			<p>Jones nodded. “Probably you did know. The misadventure is rare of which we are not warned in advance. We cannot see the future but the future sees us. It sends us messages which we call premonitions.”</p>
			<p>Instantly Cassy was back in the Tamburini’s room, where she had seen both beauty and horror. She had not reached the latter yet and the sudden vision Lennox dissipated.</p>
			<p>“Stuff and nonsense! Haven’t you anything else to say?”</p>
			<p>Amiably Jones turned to him. “I can say that no one is wise on an empty stomach.” He turned to Cassy. “The Splendor is not far. Will you dine with us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser?”</p>
			<p>Violently Lennox repeated it; “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser! Miss Cara is no more <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser than you are.”</p>
			<p>“To err is highly literary,” Jones with great meekness replied. “I hear that it is even human.”</p>
			<p>Cassy reached again for the bundle. “It is only natural. If I had been told in advance, I could not have believed it. I could not have believed that mock marriages occur anywhere except in cheap fiction. But we live and unlearn. Now I must run.”</p>
			<p>Lennox took her hand. “I owe you a debt. Count on me.”</p>
			<p>He spoke gravely and the gravity of it, the force that he exhaled, comforted Cassy’s bruised little heart and the comfort, the first that she had had, made her lip twitch. None of that, though! Reacting she rallied and smiled.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye⁠—and good luck!”</p>
			<p>Jones saw her to the door, followed her out, followed her down to the street, where for a moment he detained her.</p>
			<p>“Just a word, if you don’t mind. You have been abominably treated and you seek no revenge. That is very fine. You have been abominably treated and you bear no malice. That is superior. You have been abominably treated and you accept it with a smile. That is alchemy. It is only a noble nature that can extract the beautiful from the base. Where do you live?”</p>
			<p>At the change of key Cassy laughed but she told him. “Goodbye,” she added. “My love to your cat.”</p>
			<p>She passed on into the sunset. The bundle seemed heavy now, but her heart was lighter. She had got it off, Lennox knew, presently a young woman would be informed and though she could not be expected to dance at the wedding, yet, after all⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>The Park took her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
