<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>In the shouted extras that succeeded the initial news of the murder, Margaret Austen was mentioned, not as the criminal, no one less criminal than the girl could be imagined, but as being associated with the parties involved.</p>
			<p>That was her misfortune and a very grievous misfortune, though, however grievous, it was as nothing to other circumstances for which she subsequently blamed herself, after having previously attributed them to fate, or rather, as fate is more modernly known, to karma.</p>
			<p>Any belief may console. A belief in karma not only consoles, it explains. As such it is not suited to those who accept things on faith, which is a very good way to accept to them. It may be credulous to believe that Jehovah dictated the ten commandments. But the commandments are sound. Moreover it is perhaps better to be wrong in one’s beliefs than not to have any.</p>
			<p>Margaret Austen believed in karma and in many related and wonderful things. Her face showed it. It showed other things; appreciation, sympathy, unworldliness, good-breeding and that minor charm that beauty is. It showed a girl good to look at, good through and through; a girl tall, very fair, who smiled readily, rarely laughed and never complained.</p>
			<p>It is true that at the time this drama begins it would have been captious of her to have complained of anything were it not that life is so ordered that it has sorrow for shadow. The shadow on this human rose was her mother.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen had seen worse days and never proposed to see them again. Among the chief assets of her dear departed was a block of New Haven. The stock, before collapsing, shook. Then it tripped, fell and kept at it. Through what financial clairvoyance the dear departed’s trustee got her out, just in time, and, quite illegally but profitably, landed her in Standard Oil is not a part of this drama. But meanwhile she had shuddered. Like many another widow, to whom New Haven was as good as Governments, she might have been in the street. Pointing at her had been that spectre⁠—Want!</p>
			<p>It was just that which she never proposed to see again. The spectre in pointing had put a mark on this woman who was arrogant, ambitious and horribly shrewd.</p>
			<p>A tall woman with a quick tongue, a false front, an air of great affability and, when on parade, admirably sent out, she ruled her daughter, or thought she did, which is not quite the same thing.</p>
			<p>Margaret Austen was ruled by her conscience and her beautiful beliefs. These were her masters. This human rose was their lovely slave. But latterly a god had enthralled her. It was with wonder and thanksgiving that she recognised the overlordship of that brat of a divinity, whom poets call Eros, and thinkers the Genius of the Species.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, who had danced many a time before his shrine, had no objection whatever to the godlet, except only when he neglected to appear Olympianly, as divinity should, with a nimbus of rentrolls and gold.</p>
			<p>In view of the fact that he had come to Margaret in deshabille, that is to say without any discernible nimbus, he affronted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen’s ambitious eyes.</p>
			<p>Of that she said nothing to Margaret. But at dinner one evening she summarised it to Peter Verelst who sat at her right.</p>
			<p>The room, which was furnished with tolerable taste, gave on Park Avenue where she resided. At her left was Monty Paliser. Farther down were Margaret, Lennox and Kate Schermerhorn. Coffee had been served. Paliser was talking to Miss Schermerhorn; Lennox to Margaret.</p>
			<p>“I don’t like it,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen said evenly to Peter Verelst. “But what can I do?”</p>
			<p>Peter Verelst was an old New Yorker and an old beau. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen had known him when she was in shorter frocks than those then in vogue. Even as a child she had been ahead of the fashion.</p>
			<p>“Do?” Verelst repeated. “Do nothing.”</p>
			<p>“I am a snob,” she resumed, expecting him to contradict her. “I did hope that Margaret, with her looks, would marry brilliantly.”</p>
			<p>Peter Verelst bent over his coffee. “The young man next door?”</p>
			<p>Out of the corner of an eye <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen glanced at Paliser and then back at Verelst. “Well, something of the kind.”</p>
			<p>Verelst raised his cup. He had known Lennox’ father. He knew and liked the son. For Margaret he had an affection that was almost⁠—and which might have been⁠—paternal. But, noting the barometer, he steered into the open.</p>
			<p>“Have Lennox here morning, noon and night. See to it that Margaret has every opportunity to get sick to death of him. Whereas if you interfere⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, as though invoking the saints, lifted her eyes. “Ah, I know! If I had not been interfered with I would not have taken Austen. Much good it did me!”</p>
			<p>Verelst, his hand on the tiller, nodded. “There you are! That locksmith business is very sound. Love revels in it. But give him his head and goodbye. Sooner or later he is bound to take to his heels, but, the more he is welcomed, the sooner he goes. The history of love is a history of farewells.”</p>
			<p>Paliser, who had caught the last phrase, felt like laughing and consequently looked very serious. The spectacle of two antiques discussing love seemed to him as hilarious as two paupers discussing wealth. He patted his tie.</p>
			<p>“Very interesting topic, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen.”</p>
			<p>The woman smiled at him. “Love? Yes. How would you define it?”</p>
			<p>Paliser returned her smile. “A mutual misunderstanding.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen’s smile deepened. “Would you like to have one?”</p>
			<p>“With your daughter, yes.”</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="fr">Et moi donc!</i> thought this lady, who, like others of our aristocracy, occasionally lapsed into French. But she said: “Why not enter the lists?”</p>
			<p>“I thought they were closed.”</p>
			<p>“Are they ever?”</p>
			<p>But now Verelst addressed the too charming young man. “How is your father?”</p>
			<p>“In his usual poor health, thank you.”</p>
			<p>“What does he say about the war?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing very original⁠—that the Kaiser ought to be sent to Devil’s Island. But that I told him would be an insult to Dreyfus, who was insulted enough. The proper place for the beast is the zoo. At the same time, the fellow is only a pawn. The blame rests on Rome⁠—rests on her seven hills.”</p>
			<p>Verelst drew back. In the great days, or more exactly in the great nights, he had been a pal of <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> That palship he had no intention of extending to <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr>’s son, and it was indifferently that he asked: “In what way?”</p>
			<p>Kate Schermerhorn, who had been talking to Margaret and to Lennox, turned. Lennox also had turned. Paliser had the floor, or rather the table. He made short work of it.</p>
			<p>“It was Caesar’s policy to create a solitude and call it peace. That policy Rome abandoned. Otherwise, that is if she had continued to turn the barbarians into so many dead flies, their legs in the air, there would be no barbarian now on the throne of Prussia. There would be no Prussia, no throne, no war.”</p>
			<p>You ought to write for the comic papers, thought Verelst, who said: “Well, there is one comfort. It can’t last forever.”</p>
			<p>With feigned sympathy <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen took it up. “Ah, yes, but meanwhile there is that poor Belgium!”</p>
			<p>“By the way,” Paliser threw in. “I have a box or two for the Relief Fund at the Splendor tonight. Would anybody care to go?”</p>
			<p>Kate Schermerhorn, who looked like a wayward angel, exclaimed at it: “Oh, do let’s. There’s to be a duck of a medium and I am just dying to have my fortune told.”</p>
			<p>Verelst showed his handsome false teeth. “No need of a medium for that, my dear. Your path is one of destruction. You will bowl men over as you go.”</p>
			<p>Kate laughed at him. “You seem very upright.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen turned to Margaret. “If you care to go, we might get our wraps.”</p>
			<p>A moment later, when the women had left the room and the men were reseated, Verelst stretched a hand to Lennox. “Again I congratulate you and with all my heart.”</p>
			<p>Keith Lennox grasped that hand, shook it, smiled. The smile illuminated a face which, sombre in repose, then was radiant. Tall and straight, hard as nails, he had the romantic figure. In a costume other than evening clothes, he might have walked out of a tapestry.</p>
			<p>With ambiguous amiability, Paliser smiled also. Already Margaret’s beauty had stirred him. Already it had occurred to him that Lennox was very invitingly in the way.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
