<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXI</h2>
			<p>On leaving the walk-up Jones discovered a restaurant that he judged convenient and vile. But the convenience appealed, and the villainy of the place did not extend to the telephone-book, which was the first thing he ordered.</p>
			<p>While waiting for it, it occurred to him that in a novel the death he had witnessed would seem very pat. Why is life so artificial? he wonderingly asked.</p>
			<p>The query suggested another. It concerned not the decedent but his daughter.</p>
			<p>By the Lord Harry, he told himself, her linen shall not be washed in public if I can prevent it, and what is the use in being a novelist if you can’t invent?</p>
			<p>But now the book was before him. In it he found that Dunwoodie resided near Columbia University. It was ages since he had ventured in that neighbourhood, which, when finally he got there, gave him the agreeable sensation of being in a city other than New York.</p>
			<p>Hic Labor, Haec Quies, he saw written on the statue of a tall maiden, and though, in New York, quiet is to be had only in the infrequent cemeteries, deep down, yet with the rest of the inscription he had been engaged all day.</p>
			<p>Gravely saluting the maiden, who was but partly false, he passed on to an apartment-house and to Dunwoodie’s door, which was opened by Dunwoodie himself. In slippers and a tattered gown, he was Hogarthian.</p>
			<p>“I thought it a messenger!” he bitterly exclaimed.</p>
			<p>Jones smiled at him. “When a man of your eminence is not wrong, he is invariably right. I am a messenger.”</p>
			<p>In the voice of an ogre, Dunwoodie took it up. “What is the message, sir?”</p>
			<p>Jones pointed at the ceiling. Involuntarily, Dunwoodie looked up and then angrily at the novelist.</p>
			<p>“An order of release,” the latter announced.</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie glared. “I suppose, sir, I must let you in, but allow me to tell you⁠—”</p>
			<p>Urbanely Jones gestured. “Pray do not ask my permission, it is a privilege to listen to anything you may say.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie turned. Through a winding hall he led the way to a room in which a lane went from the threshold to a table. The lane was bordered with an underbush of newspapers, pamphlets, magazines. Behind the underbush was a forest of books. Beside the table were an armchair and a stool. From above, hung a light. Otherwise, save for cobwebs, the room was bare and very relaxing.</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie taking the chair, indicated the stool. “Now, sir!”</p>
			<p>Jones gave him the declaration.</p>
			<p>With not more than a glance Dunwoodie possessed himself of the contents. He put it down.</p>
			<p>“If I had not known you had studied law, not for a moment would that rigamarole lead me to suspect it.”</p>
			<p>In a protest which was quite futile, Jones raised a hand. “The notary is unnecessary, I know that. I know also that a dying declaration is not the best evidence, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Do you at least know that the declarant is dead?”</p>
			<p>Jones, who favoured the dramatic, nodded. “He died in my arms.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie took it in and took it out. “It is curious how crime leads to bad taste.”</p>
			<p>Jones leaned forward. “I may tell you for your information⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Spare me, I am overburdened with information as it is.”</p>
			<p>Jones sat back. He had no intention of taking Dunwoodie then behind the scenes. That would come later. But he did want to try out an invention that had occurred to him. He sighed.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you care to hear why he did it?”</p>
			<p>“Not in the least.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie fumbled in a pocket. “The district attorney may be more receptive. I shall go to him in the morning and I will thank you to go with me.”</p>
			<p>“I am not up in the morning.”</p>
			<p>“Then don’t go to bed.”</p>
			<p>From the pocket, Dunwoodie extracted an enormous handkerchief. It fascinated Jones. He had never seen one that resembled it.</p>
			<p>“You dispose of me admirably. The district attorney, I suppose, will enter a nolle prosequi.”</p>
			<p>In that handkerchief, Dunwoodie snorted. “You may suppose what you like.”</p>
			<p>Jones laughed. “It is my business to suppose. I suppose, when the murder was committed, that Lennox was at home. If I am right, he has an alibi which his servant can confirm.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie stared. “Whatever your business may be, it is not to teach me mine.”</p>
			<p>Jones drew out a cigarette-case. “Let me sit at your feet then. What does Lennox say?”</p>
			<p>“How inquisitive you are! But to be rid of you, he⁠—”</p>
			<p>“May I smoke?” Jones interrupted.</p>
			<p>“Good God, sir! You are not preparing to make a night of it?”</p>
			<p>“I have one or two other little matters in hand. But since I may suppose all I like, I take it that Lennox intended to go to the opera, though I fancy also that he had no intention of going to Paliser’s box. I suppose that he intended to wait about and go for him hot and heavy when he came out. I suppose also that, while dressing, he changed his mind. And, by the way, isn’t there such a writ as a mandamus, or a duces tecum? I would like my paper-cutter returned.”</p>
			<p>“Confound your paper-cutter! You don’t deserve to have me admit it, but Lennox’ account of it is that before going on to the opera, he stopped to write a letter to Miss⁠—er⁠—Hum! Ha!”</p>
			<p>“Miss Austen?”</p>
			<p>“And when he got through it was midnight.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll lay a pippin he didn’t send it.”</p>
			<p>“What, sir?”</p>
			<p>“Lennox had a lot to say. It was gagging him. He would have suffocated if he had kept it in. The effect of getting it on black and white was an emetic. He read it over, judged it inadequate, tore it up. I have done the same thing. I daresay you have.”</p>
			<p>The great man sat back. “His scrap-basket has been visited. The letter was there.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, I suppose the short and long of it is, you will have him out to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>“As I said, you may suppose all you like.”</p>
			<p>“Without indiscretion then, may I suppose that you live here alone?”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie flourished his handkerchief. It was cotton and big as a towel.</p>
			<p>“I am not as young as you are, sir, and whether erroneously or not, I believe myself better informed.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” Jones put in. “Your physiognomy corroborates you. I have sometimes thought that it were difficult for the Seven Sages to be as wise as you look⁠—which is the reason, perhaps, why I do not quite follow you.”</p>
			<p>“I did not imagine that you would. You are a sociable being. Every imbecile is pitiably sociable. But for a thinking man, a man without vices and without virtues, what is there except solitude?”</p>
			<p>Appreciatively Jones motioned. “Thank you for descending to my level. As it happens, I also have a cloister where I have the double advantage of being by myself and of not being with others. But now that I am in your hermitage, there is this Matter of Ziegler, concerning which I would like the benefit of your professional advice.”</p>
			<p>“Hum! Ha! Got yourself mixed up with a woman and want me to pull you out. Well, sir, you will find it expensive. But a hermitage is not an office. I shall expect you at mine to-morrow. I shall expect you before ten.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie stood up. “To-morrow, though, your turpitudes will have to wait. Have you been served?”</p>
			<p>Jones laughed. “Not yet.”</p>
			<p>“Time enough then. You can find the door?”</p>
			<p>Through the lane, bordered by rubbish, and on through the winding hall, Jones went out. As Dunwoodie had said, there was time enough. There had been no service⁠—no summons, no complaint. It might be that there would be none. The matter might adjust itself without any. It might be that there was no ground for action. Jones could not tell. After the manner of those who have crammed for a law examination, there had been a moment when he knew, or thought he knew, it all. But also after the manner of those who have not taken the post-graduate course which practice is, the crammed knowledge had gone. Only remnants and misfits remained. It was on these that he had conjectured the suit which, meanwhile, constituted a nut to crack. There was time and to spare though. Besides, for the moment, he had other things to do.</p>
			<p>Then, as he went on to attend to them, he wondered why Dunwoodie, who, he thought, must make a hundred thousand a year, lived like a ragpicker.</p>
			<p>Before him, the starshell, which imagination projects, burst suddenly.</p>
			<p>He said he had no virtues and probably told the truth, Jones decided. In which case he cannot be a miser. But he also said he had no vices and probably lied like a thief. The old scoundrel is a philanthropist. I would wager an orchard of pippins on that, but there is no one to take me up⁠—except this policeman.</p>
			<p>“Officer,” he resumed aloud. “Behold a stranger in a strange land. By any miracle, is there a taxi-stand nearby?”</p>
			<p>Then presently Jones was directing a driver.</p>
			<p>“The Tombs!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
