<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
			<p>Through the inflated proprieties of social New York, Paliser’s father had driven four-in-hand, and at a pace so klinking that social New York cut him dead. A lot he cared! The high-steppers in their showy harness flung along as brazenly as before. He did not care. He had learned to since. Age is instructive. It teaches that though a man defy the world, he cannot ignore it. But tastes are inheritable. Monty Paliser came in for a few, but not for the four-in-hand. Less vigorous than his father, though perhaps more subtle, he preferred the tandem.</p>
			<p>In preparation for one that he had in view, he looked in, not at a mart, but at a shrine.</p>
			<p>It was on the afternoon succeeding Cassy’s visit to his slippery floor. The day was radiant, a day not of spring, or of summer, but of both. Above was a sky of silk wadded with films of white cotton. From below there ascended a metallic roar, an odour of gasoline⁠—the litanies and incense of the temple, Semitic and Lampsacene, that New York long since became.</p>
			<p>Lampsacus worshipped a very great god and worshipped him uniquely. New York, more devout and less narrow, has worshipped him also and has knelt too to a god almost as great. Their combined rituals have exalted the temple into a department-store where the pilgrim obtains anything he can pay for, which is certainly a privilege. Youth, beauty, virtue, even smiles, even graciousness, Priapus and Mammon bestow on the faithful that garland the altars with cash.</p>
			<p>In Park Avenue, on this radiant afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen and Paliser were occupied with their devotions. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen was priestess and Paliser was saying his prayers; that is, he was jingling his money, not audibly, but none the less potently in the lady’s uplifted eyes.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the lady, who as usual did not mean it. “It is too bad. Margaret, the dear child, is so inexperienced that I feel that I must blame myself. I have kept from her⁠—how shall I put it? Well, everything, and when she learned about this, I could not tell her that it was all very usual. It would have offended her modesty too much.”</p>
			<p>Pausing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen smiled her temple smile. “I could not tell her, as somebody expressed it, that actresses happen in the best of families, but I left her to decide whether she cared to have them happen in her ménage.”</p>
			<p>The priestess, looking to the north and south, resumed: “It might have been different if she had been older, more experienced and had really cared for him. But how could she care? The child’s nature is dormant. She does not know what love is. He is very nice, I have not a word to say against him, not one, but a lamp-post would be quite as capable of arousing her affection. She accepted him, I grant you that and you may well ask why. I know I asked myself the same thing, until I remembered that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Austen offered to take me to Niagara Falls and I married him just to go there. At the time I was a mere chit and Margaret is little more. Now, I am not, I hope, censorious and I do not say that she had a lucky escape, but I can say she thinks so. It was such a relief that it gave her neuralgia. But the child will be up and about in no time and then you must come and dine. You got my note?”</p>
			<p>Paliser stifled a yawn. The priestess was, he knew, entirely willing to deliver whatever he wanted at temple rates. But he knew, too, there were forms and ceremonies to be observed. Being bored was one of them.</p>
			<p>At another portal he has been obliged to go through the forms with Carlotta Tamburini. She also had wearied him, though less infernally than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen, and of the two he preferred her. The ex-diva was certainly canaille, but her paw was open and ready, whereas this woman’s palm, while quite as itching, was delicately withheld. Their gods were identical. It was the shrines that differed. The one at which the Tamburini presided was plain as a pikestaff. The Austen’s was bedecked like a girl on her wedding-day. Behind each Priapus leered. Above both was the shining face of Mammon.</p>
			<p>In the present rites, that which wearied Paliser was the recital of the reason of the broken engagement. It was broken, that was the end of it, an end which, in ordinary circumstances, he would have regretted. Ordinarily it would have made the running too easy. The hurdles were gone. There were no sticks, no fences. It would not even have been a race, just a canter. The goal remained but the sporting chance of beating Lennox to it would have departed. That is the manner in which ordinarily he would have regarded it. But the war, that was to change us all, already had changed his views. The draft act had not then been passed, yet it was realised that some such act would be passed, and generally it was assumed that among the exempt would be men with wives dependent on them and cogently he had reflected that if he married that would be his case precisely. At the same time he could not take a possible bride by the scruff of the neck and drag her off to a clergyman. Though it be to save your hide, such things are not done. Even in war-time there are wearisome preliminaries and these preliminaries, which a broken engagement abridged, the neuralgia of a possible bride prolonged. That was distinctly annoying and a moment later, when he had the chance, he vented the annoyance on Lennox.</p>
			<p>“You got my note?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen was asking.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he replied, “and I will come with pleasure. Meanwhile, if my sympathy is not indiscreet, please convey it to your daughter.” The kick followed. “Though, to be sure, Lennox is a loose fish.”</p>
			<p>“He is?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen unguardedly exclaimed. Not for a moment had she suspected it and, in her surprise, her esteem for him jumped. Good heavens! she thought. How I have maligned him!</p>
			<p>In the exclamation and the expression which her eyes took on, Paliser divined some mental somersault, divined too that behind it was something obscure, something that she was keeping back. Warily he backed.</p>
			<p>“Oh, as for that, loose fish may mean anything. It is a term that has been applied to me and I dare say very correctly. If I did not live like a monk, I should be jailed for my sins.”</p>
			<p>He is his father all over again, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Austen cheerfully reflected and absently asked: “How is he?”</p>
			<p>“Lennox? I haven’t an idea.”</p>
			<p>“I mean your father.”</p>
			<p>“In a great hurry, thank you. The war has gone to his head.”</p>
			<p>“At his age? Surely⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He wants me to go,” said Paliser, who had no intention of it whatever and whom subsequent events completely exempted. “He is in a hurry for me to enlist and in a greater hurry to have me marry.”</p>
			<p>Austerely, this pleasant woman grabbed it. “It is your duty!”</p>
			<p>That was too much for Paliser, who, knowing as well as she did what she was driving at, wanted to laugh. Like the yawn, he suppressed it.</p>
			<p>The priestess’s austerity faded. A very fair mimic of exaltation replaced it. “Whoever she is, how proud she will be! A war-bride!”</p>
			<p>But Paliser, who had his fill, was rising and, abandoning histrionics, she resumed: “The 24th at eight; don’t forget!” Then as he passed from the portal, the priestess lifted her hands. “What a fish! Fast or loose, what a fish!”</p>
			<p>Above her Mammon glowed, behind her leered Priapus.</p>
			<p>Through the sunny streets, Paliser drove to the Athenæum, where everybody was talking war. The general consensus of ignorance was quite normal.</p>
			<p>Lennox, seated with Jones at a window, was summarising his own point of view. “In a day or two I shall run down to Mineola, Perhaps they will take me on at the aviation field. Anyway I can try.”</p>
			<p>Jones crossed himself. He is signing his death-warrant, he thought. But he said: “Take you, Icarus. They will fly away with you. You will become a cavalier of the clouds, a toreador of the aerial arena, an archangel soaring among the Eolian melodies of shrapnel. I envy, I applaud, but I cannot emulate. The upper circles are reserved for youth and over musty tomes I have squandered mine. I am thirty-two by the clock and I should hie me to the grave-digger that he may take my measure. And yet if I could⁠—if I could!⁠—I would like to be one of the liaison chaps and fall if I must in a shroud of white swords.”</p>
			<p>Sombrely Lennox considered his friend. “Your shroud of white swords is ridiculous.”</p>
			<p>Jones agreed with him. To change the subject, he rattled a paper. “Have you seen this? There is an account here of a man who shot his girl. He thought her untrue. Probably she was.”</p>
			<p>“Reason enough then,” said Lennox, who latterly had become very murderous.</p>
			<p>“I wonder! Anyway, though the paper does not say so, that was not his reason. The poor devil killed her not because she had been untrue, but because he loved her. He killed the thing he loved the best out of sheer affection. Unfortunately, for his virtues, he loved her innocently, ignorantly, as most men do love, without any idea that the one affection worth giving is a love that nothing can alter, a love that can not only forgive but console.”</p>
			<p>“Is that what you call originality?” Lennox severely enquired. “If so, I have never run across any of it in your books.”</p>
			<p>“Heaven forbid that you should, dear boy. I live by the sweat of my pen. Originality never has, and never will make a best-seller.”</p>
			<p>It was while Jones was airing these platitudes that Paliser entered the room. He approached the two men. Lennox at once got up, turned his back, marched away.</p>
			<p>A few days later, Jones, in reviewing the incident, wondered whether Lennox could, even then, have suspected. But, at the moment, in apology for him, he merely lied.</p>
			<p>“I frightened him off with shop-talk.”</p>
			<p>Paliser took the vacant seat “What are you writing?”</p>
			<p>“Cheques. There is nothing simpler and, except cash, nothing so easily understood. To keep my hand in I will write one now.”</p>
			<p>Then Jones too got up. Paliser, to whom solitude was always irksome, found himself alone. But his solitude was not prolonged. A man joined him. Another followed. Presently there was a group.</p>
			<p>From the table where Jones had gone, the inkbeast saw and seeing thought: Empires may totter, nations fall. The face of the earth will be changed. But the toady endureth forever.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
