<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
			<p>The two hundred and fifty⁠—less ten percent⁠—which an imaginary <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish had paid for the pleasure of not hearing Cassy sing, transported the girl who was not given to transports. These subsiding, she viewed the matter from its business aspect. She needed a frock, a wrap, a hat, gloves, shoes and certain things that are nowhere visible except in advertisements, shopwindows and extreme privacy. Also, her hair required tralalaing. Meanwhile, first and foremost, Lennox must be paid. The subsidy was not too much by a penny. These considerations occupied but an instant.</p>
			<p>“When is it?” she asked the Tamburini, who, a moment before, had dumbfounded her with the money.</p>
			<p>“When is what?” inquired the ex-star who already had forgotten <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish.</p>
			<p>“Why, the concert!”</p>
			<p>Carlotta Tamburini was dressed like a fat idol, in silk and false pearls. There the idolatry ceased. In her hand was an umbrella and on her head a hat of rose-leaves which a black topknot surmounted. About her shoulders was a feather boa. It seemed a bit mangy. Seated on Cassy’s bed she looked at a window that gave on a wall. Cassy was standing. Behind Cassy was a door which the extinguished light had closed. Beyond, in the living-room, was the marquis. Anything that he did not hear would not hurt him.</p>
			<p>“Oh, she’ll let us know.”</p>
			<p>“What sort of a catamount is she?”</p>
			<p>At that the former prima donna’s imagination balked. But she got something out. “Nice enough. What do you care?”</p>
			<p>“I hate all those snobs.”</p>
			<p>“So do I,” said the Tamburini, who worshipped the breed even when nonexistent. “But don’t go and include him. If it hadn’t been for him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Was he with her?”</p>
			<p>“You ought to have heard the way he went on about you. She said: ‘Why, Monty, I do believe you’d like to marry her.’ ”</p>
			<p>Cassy’s mouth twitched as she munched it. “She presumed to say that! She’s an insolent beast.”</p>
			<p>“He shut her up, I can tell you. He said if he got on his knees, you wouldn’t dust your feet on him.”</p>
			<p>“That jackanapes! I should say not!”</p>
			<p>“You might say worse. Take the Metro. You’re spat on if you’re down and spat at if you’re up. A dog’s own life.” Lifting her voice, the fat woman sang: “<i xml:lang="fr">Croyez-moi car j’ai passé par la.</i>”</p>
			<p>“What has that to do with it?”</p>
			<p>Nothing whatever, the Tamburini truthfully reflected but omitted to say so. Paliser, in producing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish, had also produced the programme. With both was a cheque. With the cheque was the assurance of another and a bigger one. She had only to earn it. To earn it she had only to follow the programme. The poor soul was trying to. The job was not easy. Cassy was skittish. A pull on the rein and she would kick the applecart over.</p>
			<p>Femininely she discounted it all. Cassy was not worth the time, the trouble, particularly the careful handling. There were girls in plenty, quite as good-looking, who, without stopping to count two, or even one, would jump at it. But there you were! Paliser did not want partridges that flew broiled into his mouth. A true sportsman, he liked to snare the bird. The feminine in her understood that also. Besides it was all grist for her mill. But the grist was uphill, and if the noble marquis got so much as an inkling of it, he was just the sort of damn fool to whip out his sword-cane and run her through. The honour of the Casa-Evora, what? Yet, being on the job, she buckled to it.</p>
			<p>“What will you get, dearie?”</p>
			<p>Cassy sat down. Her previous ruminations returned. Escorting them was a vision of a baronial castle. In the hall, a guest-book in which you wrote your name. A squad of lackeys that showed you into a suite of salons. Rugs on which there was peace; sofas on which there was ease; étagères on which there were reveries. Nothing else. No cupboards hung with confections. No models sailing in and out. Nothing so commercial as anything for sale. Nothing but patrician repose and the chatelaine⁠—a duchess disguised as a dressmaker⁠—who might, or might not, ask you upstairs.</p>
			<p>In war time at that! Though, it is true, Congress had only just declared it.</p>
			<p>But, Cassy reflected, two hundred and fifty, with Lennox deducted and less ten percent, would not take her as far as the drawbridge. The fleeting vision of the castle passed, replaced by the bargain seductions of department-stores.</p>
			<p>Fingering the money, she said: “Where does this person live? She ought to send a taxi.”</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="it">Certamente</i>,” replied the fat woman, lapsing, as she occasionally did lapse, into the easy Italian of the lyric stage. “She certainly will.”</p>
			<p>Cassy jumped up. “Well, then, you come along while I take a look about. Afterward we will have lunch. I’ll eat, you can watch me and I’ll tell you how it tastes. There’s the telephone!”</p>
			<p>Cassy opened the door, went out into the narrow and shadowy hall and took the receiver.</p>
			<p>“Yes? Oh! None the better for the asking. Tonight? Impossible. Tomorrow? Perhaps. Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>“Who was that?” the noble marquis called from the room beyond.</p>
			<p>“An imbecile who wants me to dine and go to the opera.”</p>
			<p>“Not that Paliser?”</p>
			<p>Cassy, poking her head in at him, threw him a kiss and returned to the Tamburini with whom, a little later, she was praying among the worshippers that thread the sacred and silent way where Broadway and Sixth Avenue meet.</p>
			<p>In an adjacent basilica, the atmosphere charged with pious emanations, with envy, malice, greed and all other charitableness, choked the girl. But at last the holy rites were ended. To the voluntary of $109.99, she passed into the peace of Herald Square where the ex-diva swayed, stopped and holding her umbrella as one holds a guitar, looked hopelessly and helplessly about.</p>
			<p>“You’re not preparing to serenade the Elevated?” Cassy bawled in her ear.</p>
			<p>In the slam-bang of trains and the metallic howls of surface cars that herded and volplaned about them, the fat lady, now apparently gone mad, was gesticulating insanely. Yet she was but indicating, or trying to indicate, the relative refuge of a side street in which there was a cook-shop.</p>
			<p>Then, presently, after all the dangers that may be avoided in remaining at home, and supplied with such delights as clam fritters offer, she savorously remarked: “I hope I am not going to be sick.”</p>
			<p>The charm of scented streets, the sedatives of shopping, the joy of lightsome fritters, these things, combined with the job, the unearned cheque and the fear of losing both, made her ghastly.</p>
			<p>Cassy, devoid of pity, said: “Have some beer.”</p>
			<p>The Tamburini gulped. “I couldn’t talk to you this morning and I’ve got to. It’s for your own good, dearie; it is, so help me! Supposing he is a jackanapes. What do you want? A prizefighter? Take it from me, whether he is one or the other, in no time it will be quite the same.”</p>
			<p>Cassy’s lips curled. “<i xml:lang="fr">Croyez-moi car j’ai passé par la.</i>” But, in mocking the woman, she frowned. “What business is it of yours?”</p>
			<p>The fallen star gulped again. Conscious that she had struck the wrong note, she struck another. “Your papa is no better, is he? Between you and me and the bedpost, I doubt if he ever will be. I doubt if he plays again. You’ll have to look after him. How’re you going to? You can’t expect to sing every night to the tune of two hundred and fifty. Not with war marching in on us. Not with everybody hard up.”</p>
			<p>Cassy had been about to order a chocolate éclair. The new note stayed her. But though new, it was not novel. She had heard it before. It rang true. Absently she shoved at her plate.</p>
			<p>In theory she knew her way about. The migratory systems of domestic experience said nothing to her, nor, thus far, had the charts of matrimony either. In the sphere of life to which a walk-up leads, the charts were dotted with but the postman and the corner druggist. Men and plenty of them she had met, but they too said nothing and not at all because they were dumb, but because, as the phrase is, they did not talk her language. But for every exception there is perhaps a rule. The one man who did speak her language, had held his tongue.</p>
			<p>Now, as she shoved at her plate, she saw him, saw the tea-caddy, saw his rooms and saw too, as she left them, the girl to whom he was engaged. In the memory of that she lingered and looked down.</p>
			<p>“Why, he could lead an orchestra of his own, your papa could.”</p>
			<p>Cassy looked up. She had been far away, too far, in a land where dreams do not come true. Impatiently she twisted. “What?”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t you hear me, dearie? I was talking about money⁠—bushels of it.”</p>
			<p>About the bushels the woman rolled her tongue. They tasted better than the fritters.</p>
			<p>A waiter approached. The room was long, dark, narrow, slovenly, spaced with tables on which were maculate cloths and lamps with faded shades. Greasily the waiter produced the bill.</p>
			<p>“Bushels!” she appetisingly repeated.</p>
			<p>Cassy paid. The waiter slouched away.</p>
			<p>“You will drive through life in a hundred horsepower car and be fined for speeding. The papers will say: ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pal⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>“What did he pay you to tell me that?” Cassy exploded at her.</p>
			<p>Unruffled by the shot, which was part and parcel of the job, and realising that any denial would only confirm what at most could be but a suspicion, the former diva fingered her pearls and assumed an air of innocence.</p>
			<p>But already Cassy had covered her with her blotting-paper look. “As if I cared!”</p>
			<p>“Dearie, he did pay me. He paid me the compliment of supposing that I take an interest in you. But he said nothing except what I said he said. He said if he got down on his knees you would turn your back on him.”</p>
			<p>“Then he is cleverer than he looks.”</p>
			<p>“Well, anyway, he is clever enough to have bushels of money and that is the greatest cleverness there is.”</p>
			<p>“In New York,” retorted Cassy, who had never been anywhere else, physically at least, though mentally her little feet had trod the streets of Milan, the boards of the Scala.</p>
			<p>“It can’t be much different in Patagonia,” replied this lady, who, to save her life, could not have told whether the land was Asiatic or African, nor who, to save her soul⁠—if the latter were still salvable⁠—could not have told that it was neither. “Besides,” she added, “I was only thinking of your poor, dear papa.”</p>
			<p>Cassy said nothing. She stood up. She was making for the door and the charm of the scented streets.</p>
			<p>Ma Tamby sighed, rose and followed. It was the devil’s own job. Housebreaking must be easier!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
