<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</h2>
			<p>Cassy sat in the kitchen. Before her were a cheque and a letter. The letter was from the theatre-man. The cheque was Dunwoodie’s. The cheque begged to be cashed, the letter begged her to call.</p>
			<p>During the night she had gone looking along an avenue where there were houses with candid windows from which faces peered and smiled. But it was not for these that she was looking and she awoke in a tempest of farewells.</p>
			<p>Now, across the court, in the kitchen opposite, were two inoffensive beings. On that evening when her father had made her cry, they had seemed unreal. On this forenoon their baseless appearance persisted. But their unreality was not confined to them. Their kitchen, the court, the building shared it. They were all unreal, everything was, except one thing only, which perhaps was more unreal than all things else.</p>
			<p>She looked at the letter and from it at the cheque. The day before, on returning from the shower of millions that had caught and drenched her in Broad Street, she was not entirely dry. The glisten of the golden rain hung all about her. None the less on reaching the walk-up she forgot it. There were other matters, more important, that she had in mind. But only a philosopher could be drenched as she had been and remain unaffected. The bath is too voluptuous for the normal heart. On its waters float argosies crimson-hulled, purple-rigged, freighted with dreams come true. You have but a gesture to make. Those dreams are spaniels crouching at your feet. At a bath not dissimilar but financially far shallower, Monte Cristo cried: “The world is mine!” It was very amusing of him. But though, since then, values have varied, a bagatelle of ten millions is deep enough for any girl, sufficiently deep at least for its depths to hold strange things.</p>
			<p>At those things, strange indeed and yet not unfamiliar, Cassy beckoned. In their embrace she saw herself, as Jones had pictured her, going about, giving money away, strewing it full-handed, changing sobs into smiles. The picture lacked novelty. Often she had dreamed it. Only recently, on the afternoon just before the clock struck twelve, just before the gardener lit his pipe and the mask had fallen, only then, and, relatively, that was but yesterday, she had promenaded in it. It was a dream she had dreamed when a child, that had haunted her girlhood, that had abided since then. It was the dream of a dream she had dreamed without daring to believe in its truth. Now, from the core of the web that is spun by the spiderous fates, out it had sprung. There, before her eyes, within her grasp was that miracle, a rainbow solidified, vapour made tangible, a dream no longer a dream but a palette and a palette that you could toss in the air, put in the bank, secrete or squander, a palette with which you could paint the hours and make them twist to jewelled harps. No more walk-up! Good-bye, kitchy! Harlem, addio! The gentleman with the fabulous nose could whistle. Vaudeville, indeed! She could buy the shop, buy a dozen of them, tear them down, build them up, throw them into one and sing there, sing what she liked, when she liked, as she liked. Yes, but for whom? God of gods, for whom?</p>
			<p>A local newspaper bears⁠—or bore⁠—a sage device: La nuit porte conseil. That night, on her white bed, in her black room, Cassy sought it. But the counsel that night brings is not delivered while you toss about. Night waits until you sleep. Then, to the subjective self that never sleeps, the message is delivered. It may be fallible, often it is and, in our scheme of things, what is there that is not? Yet in any dilemma bad advice may be better than none. Then, without transition, the black room changed into an avenue where faces peered and smiled. It was not though for these that she was looking, but for her way. It must have been very narrow. Though she looked and looked she could not find it. Yet it was near, perhaps just around the corner. But in some manner, she could not reach it. Sleep sank her deeper. When she awoke, there it was.</p>
			<p>Now as she sat in the kitchen, before which, in the kitchen opposite, bundles of baseless appearances came and went, she began counting her wealth on her fingers. Youth! Up went her thumb. Health! The forefinger. Lungs! The second finger. Not being a fright! The fourth. How rich she was! But was there not something else? Oh, yes! Sadly she smiled. A clear conscience! She had forgotten that and that came first. Youth, health, lungs, looks, these were gamblers’ tokens in the great roulette of life. In the hazards of chance at any moment she might lose one or all, as eventually she must lose them and remain no poorer than before. But her first asset which she had counted last, that was her fortune, the estate she held by virtue of a trust so guardedly created that if she lost one mite, the whole treasure was withdrawn.</p>
			<p>On the washtub⁠—covered admirably with linoleum⁠—at which she sat, were the cheque for a thousand dollars and the bid from the vaudeville man. The bid, she knew, meant money. But the cheque would beggar her.</p>
			<p>She drew breath and sat back. From above a filter of sunlight fell and told her it was noon. Across the court the bundles of baseless appearances transformed themselves into a real woman, an actual child. The kitchen in which they moved, the house in which they dwelled were no longer the perceptions of a perceiver. They also were real. So, too, was life.</p>
			<p>An hour and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy’s pasty face turned feebly red. He stammered it.</p>
			<p>No, unfortunately, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie was out. Would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser wait? In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie’s private office? And the ‘Herald’ perhaps or the ‘Times’⁠—or⁠—or⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>Everything there, Broad Street to boot, the Stock Exchange included, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy was ready and anxious to offer.</p>
			<p>No, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser would not wait⁠—and mentally she thanked her stars for it. But would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy do something for her?</p>
			<p>Would he! The brave spirit of Talleyrand must have animated that sickly young man. If what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser desired were possible it would be done: if impossible, it was done already.</p>
			<p>Cassy gave him the rare seduction of her smile. She also was entertaining an emotion or two. She had not at all known where she would find the strength to confront and confute a grandmotherly old ruffian. But luck was with her. He was out.</p>
			<p>So very good of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy then and would he please give <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie this cheque and say she’s sorry she can’t accept it or the other money either? She had said she would, but, really, it was not intended for her. Supposing she took it. She would feel like a thief in a fog. Exactly that. A thief in a fog. No, she couldn’t. Couldn’t and wouldn’t. Just as grateful though to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie. Her regrets to him and a thousand thanks.</p>
			<p>“And good-day, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy. I thank you also.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy, flushing feebly, saw her to the door, saw her to the hall without. There, while he waited with her for a descending lift, a silk hat that had just come from a malachite bench, alighted from an ascending one. Immediately the other lift took her.</p>
			<p>“Who was that?” the hat’s owner alertly asked.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Purdy rubbed his perspiring hands. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman wheeled like a rat. He looked at the cage. It had vanished. He looked at the other. Above it a moving finger pointed upward. Cold-blooded, meticulously precise, intensely respectable, none the less, for one delirious second, madness seized him. He wished to God he could hurry down, overtake the impostor, lure her into his own office, frighten her out of such wits as she possessed and buy her off for tuppence. Instantly Respectability had him by the collar. He could not. Precision gave him a kick. Wouldn’t stand if he did.</p>
			<p>Deeply he swore. The millions were gone. Hands down, without a struggle, the Paliser estate was rooked. No fault of his though, and mechanically he adjusted that hat. Damn her!</p>
			<p>In the street below, superbly, with sidereal indifference, the sun shone down on the imbecile activities of man. The storm of the day before that had drenched Cassy so abundantly, had been blown afar, blown from her forever. The sky in which a volcano had formed was remote and empty.</p>
			<p>“Ouf!” Cassy muttered in relief and muttered, too: “Now for the agent!”</p>
			<p>She had reached the corner. Just beyond was the subway. It would land her within two squares of the man’s greasy office. Now, though, suddenly, she felt a gnawing. A sandwich would taste good. Two sandwiches would taste better. Then, quite as suddenly, that vision, the street with it, everything, except one thing only, vanished.</p>
			<p>Blocking the way stood Lennox.</p>
			<p>“Where to in such a hurry?”</p>
			<p>Easily she smiled and told him. “I’m going to buy a rhinoceros.” But for all the easiness of it her tongue nearly tripped. “And what are you doing?”</p>
			<p>“I? Oh! Cleaning up.”</p>
			<p>Wall Street is not a Japanese tea-garden. It lacks the klop-klop of fountains. Yet, even in its metallic roar there may⁠—for exceptional beings⁠—be peace there. Not for Cassy, though. She could have screamed.</p>
			<p>A moment only. Lennox turned and both moved on.</p>
			<p>“Let’s get out of this.”</p>
			<p>Cassy looked up at him. “You forget my little errand.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes! The rhinoceros. Couldn’t you ask me to meet him?”</p>
			<p>“I shall be giving dinner-parties for him every evening. Would you care to come?”</p>
			<p>They had reached cavernous steps down which Cassy was going.</p>
			<p>Lennox raised his hat. “I will come to-night.”</p>
			<p>Through the metallic roar, the four words dropped and hummed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
