<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>The Italians have a proverb about waiting for some one who does not come. They call it deadly. Among the lapping shadows Lennox felt the force of it. But concluding that visitors had detained his guests, he dressed and went around a corner or two to the Athenæum Club where usually he dined.</p>
			<p>In the main room which gives on Fifth Avenue, he found Ten Eyck Jones talking war. Jones was a novelist, but he did not look like one. There was nothing commercial in his appearance, which was that of a man half-asleep, except when he talked and then he seemed very much awake. He was not fat and though an inkbeast, he dressed after the manner of those who put themselves in the best hands and then forget all about it. But for Lennox he had a superior quality, he was a friend. With him was Harry Cantillon, who, the night before, had danced away with Kate Schermerhorn. Straddling an arm of Cantillon’s chair was Fred Ogston, a young man of a type that, even before the war, was vanishing and which was known as about town. Adjacently sat Peter Verelst. Servants brought little decanters and removed others. In a corner an old man glared with envious venom at the liquors of which he had consumed too many and of which, at the price of his eyesight, he could consume no more.</p>
			<p>Jones waved at Lennox. “I have been telling these chaps that before they are much older they will be in khaki.”</p>
			<p>“Houp!” cried Cantillon. He sprang up, ran to the arched entrance, where, lightly, without effort, he turned a somersault and was gone.</p>
			<p>The old man in the corner raised himself, shuffled to a table, sat down and wrote to the house committee. Such conduct could not be tolerated! Having said it, he raised himself again and shuffled over with the letter to Dunwoodie, a lawyer with the battered face of a bulldog and a ruffian’s rumpled clothes.</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie, instead of taking the letter, gave the old man a look, one look, his famous look, the look with which⁠—it was said⁠—he reversed the Bench. Angrily the old man turned tail, collided with Paliser, apologised furiously, damning him beneath his breath, damning Dunwoodie, damning the house committee, damning the club.</p>
			<p>“Are you to dine here?” Jones asked Ogston, who swore gently, declaring that, worse luck, he was due at his aunt’s.</p>
			<p>“But you are,” Jones told Lennox. “Come on and I’ll make your hair stand on end.” He turned: “And yours, too.”</p>
			<p>Peter Verelst smoothed the back of his head. “Thank you, Ten Eyck. But such hair as I have I prefer should remain as it is.”</p>
			<p>The two men went on and up into another room, spacious, high-ceiled, set with tables, where a captain got them seated, took their orders, carefully transmitted them to a careful waiter, an omnibus meanwhile producing ice-water which Jones had promptly removed.</p>
			<p>He smiled at Lennox. “Who was the jeunesse you and Paliser were talking to last night? She had been singing.”</p>
			<p>Lennox unfolded a napkin. “I thought you were to make my hair stand on end.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said the novelist, who spoke better than he knew, “she may make Paliser’s. There’s a young man with plenty of perspective. I saw him in London just before the deluge. He was then en route for the Marquesas. I envied him that. I envied him the vanilla-scented nights; the skies, a solid crust of stars, and also, and particularly, the tattooed ghosts. But I am forgetting your hair. Were you ever in Berlin?”</p>
			<p>Lennox scowled. “Yes. Once.”</p>
			<p>“And once is too often. The last time I was there, I looked down the Wilhelmstrasse and it got up and threatened me. Barring the possibilities of future avatars, I shall not promenade there again. But I would give a red pippin, I would give two of them, to have been in Potsdam on that night, that cloudless night, the night in July, when in a room, gorgeous as only vulgarity could made it, there was sounded the crack of doom.”</p>
			<p>Jones gestured and a waiter hurried to him. He motioned him away.</p>
			<p>“You can picture it, Lennox, or, if not, who am I to refuse my aid? At the doors were lackeys; at the gates were guards. Without and beyond, to the four points of the compass, an unsuspecting world slept, toiled, feasted, fasted, occupied with its soap-bubble hates and loves. But, in that room, saurians, with titles as long as your arm, were contriving a cataclysm that was to exceed the deluge. Since then, and though it be but through the headlines, you and I stand witness to events that no mortal ever saw before. That night, in that room they were concocted. By comparison, what are the mythical exploits of Homer’s warriors, the fabulous achievements of Charlemagne’s paladins, the fading memories of Napoleon’s campaigns? What are they all by comparison to a world in flames? Hugo, with his usual sobriety, said that Napoleon inconvenienced God. Napoleon wanted Europe. These gunmen want the earth. They won’t get it. Hell is their portion. But, while they were planning the crib-cracking, I would give a red pippin to have been in their joint that night. A little more trout?”</p>
			<p>Jones turned to the waiter. “Take it away and fetch the roast.”</p>
			<p>He was about to give other orders, yet these Lennox interrupted.</p>
			<p>“But look here. You spoke of an unsuspecting world. The Kaiser had been rattling the sabre for years. Everybody knew that.”</p>
			<p>“So he had,” said Jones, who contradicted no one. “But England did not take him seriously, nor did this country either. Consequently, when the war began it was regarded as but another robber-raid which shortly would be over. That was an idea that everybody shared, even to the Kaiser, who afterward said that he had not wanted this war. Incredible as it may seem he spoke the truth. He did not want a war in which he would be tripped on the Marne, blocked on the Yser and foiled at Verdun. He wanted a war in which France would be felled, Russia rolled back, a war in which, over Serbia’s ravaged corpse, his legions could pour down across the Turkish carpet into the realm where Sardanapalus throned, beyond to that of Haroun-al-Raschid, on from thence to Ormus and the Ind, and, with the resulting thralls and treasure, overwhelm England, gut the United States, destroy civilisation and, on the ruins, set Deutschland über Alles!”</p>
			<p>“Hear! Hear!” said Lennox from between bites.</p>
			<p>Jones, after a momentary interlude with a fork, got back at it. “That is what he wanted! But to get it, he lacked one thing, one thing only. He had everything else, he had everything that forethought, ingenuity and science could provide. The arsenals were stocked. The granaries were packed, the war-chests replete. Grey-green uniforms were piled endlessly in heaps. Kiel⁠—previously stolen from Denmark, but then reconstructed and raised to the war degree⁠—at last was open. The navy was ready. The army was ready. Against any possible combination of European forces, the oiled machine was prepared. In addition, clairvoyance had supplied the pretext and stupidity the chance. Petersburg was then in the throes of a general strike⁠—which the Wilhelmstrasse had engineered. In Paris, the slipshod condition of the army had been publicly denounced. England and Ireland were nearly at each other’s throats. Yet, had they been in each other’s arms, the Kaiser was convinced that England would not interfere. Moreover in France, mobilisation required weeks; in Russia, months; and even then the Russian army, otherwise unequipped, the Tsarina had supplied with two hundred Teuton generals. That woman used to exclaim at her resemblance to Marie Antoinette. She flattered herself. It is Bazaine whom she resembled. But where was I? Oh, yes. The opportunity was so obvious and everything so neatly prepared that, for good measure, the pretext was added. An archduke, sinister when living and still more sinister dead, was, by the Kaiser’s orders, bombed to bits and the bombing fastened on Serbia. Allied stupidity provided the opportunity, imperial forethought supplied the rest. Since highwayry began, never was there such a chance. On the last gaiter was the last button. The Kaiser lacked but one thing.”</p>
			<p>Lennox shoved at his plate. “So you have said.”</p>
			<p>Jones, abandoning his fork, repeated it. “One thing! In Potsdam, on that cloudless July night, when the world, on which he proposed to batten, slept, toiled, feasted, fasted, occupied with its futile loves and hates, that thing must have occurred to him.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but confound it, what was it?”</p>
			<p>Jones lit a cigar. “Bernstorff said, or is said to have said⁠—I do not count him among my acquaintances⁠—that on that night this supercanaille showed symptoms of what I think I have seen described as vacillation. That is quite on the cards. It bears out my theory. In any event the fellow had his ambitions. He wanted to descend into the red halls of history disguised. He might have succeeded. History is very careless and to-day barely recalls that at five o’clock on the morning succeeding his marriage to a dowdy fat girl, he treated his regiment to a drill. The fact is uninteresting and would be equally unimportant were it not for the note that it struck. Subsequently, when he leaped on the throne, he shouted that those who opposed him he would smash. “There is no other law than mine”; he later announced⁠—a fine phrase and yet but a modern variant of Domitian’s: “Your god and master orders it.” Incidentally, in addition to the Garter, an honorific which the Duke of Cambridge admirably summarised as “having, sir, none of the damned nonsense of merit about it,” he had other distinctions. He had⁠—and has⁠—uranomania, that is to say, a flight of fancy in which the patient believes himself associated with God. He had also defilirium tremens, which manifested itself in those man[oe]uvres that are war’s image and in which the troops defile. Yet, when it came to the real thing, it may be that this paradomaniac lacked the stomach. Apart from the Kruger incident, and one or two other indecencies, his observance of international etiquette was relatively correct. The lackeys of history might therefore have deodorised him. With a sow’s ear a lot may be done. Have a cigar?”</p>
			<p>Lennox laughed. “I would prefer the point.”</p>
			<p>“Now, how greedy you are. Well then, here it is. On that fatidic night in July, this fellow was fifty-five.”</p>
			<p>“What of it?”</p>
			<p>“Everything. At his age Alexander had been dead twenty years.”</p>
			<p>As Jones spoke he raised his hands. “Spirit of the Great Sinner, forgive me! This scrofulous dwarf has no kinship with thee!”</p>
			<p>“No,” Jones, dropping his hands, resumed. “None. His kin are Herod, Caracalla, Attila, Genghis Khan, and Cloacus, Lord of Sewers. Those are his kin. To the shade of the Lampsacene, whom the world had forgotten; to that of Cloacus, whom civilisation had ignored, subsequently he devoted the army. For the troops he invoked them. But that night the ghosts of the others gave him pause. At his age, Caracalla, Attila, Genghis, were dead. They had died hideous, monstrous⁠—but young. Herod alone may have seemed a promising saint to swear by, though, in the obscurities of Syrian chronology, even of him he could not be sure. The one kindred hyena who, at fifty-five, had defied the world was Tsi An, the Chinese Empress, and he had helped to squelch her. Do you see it now? To burglarise the world, this thug had every advantage. The police were asleep. The coast was clear. The jimmies and the dynamite sticks were ready. Even the dark lantern was packed. The kit was complete. He had everything. He lacked nothing, except the one essential⁠—Youth! The eyes of youth are clear. His were too dimmed to foresee that the allies⁠—”</p>
			<p>Lennox was rising.</p>
			<p>Amiably Jones switched on and off again. “Hold on a minute. You have not given me the “Who’s Who” of that young woman.”</p>
			<p>In Lennox’ brain, instantly cells latent, alert, and of which he was entirely unconscious, functioned actively. Before him Cassy stood. Beside her was another. This other, very lovely, was a saint. Yet, prompted still by the cells and equally unaware of it, it occurred to him that a lovely saint may resemble a vase that is exquisite, but unresilient and perhaps even empty. Whereas a siren, like Cassy⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>Abruptly he caught himself up. The unawaited disloyalty into which he had floundered, surprised and annoyed him. He could not account for the delicate infidelity and perplexedly he looked at Jones who still was at it.</p>
			<p>“The diva I mean. The diva in duodecimo who sang at the Bazaar.”</p>
			<p>Lennox shook himself and sat down again. Modestly then the thrice-told tale was repeated⁠—Angelo Cara, a violin in one hand, a sword-cane in the other, trudging home. The attack, the rout, the rescue, the acquaintance with Cassy that ensued.</p>
			<p>Jones, absorbing the story, pigeonholed his memory with the details which, sometime, for copy purposes, might be of use.</p>
			<p>“They are Portuguese,” Lennox, rising again, concluded.</p>
			<p>Jones peered about. The great room was filled with members, eating, drinking, laughing, talking⁠—talking mainly of nothing whatever. He motioned. “Isn’t that Cantillon over there with⁠—of all people!⁠—Dunwoodie?”</p>
			<p>Lennox looked and nodded. “Cantillon is in Dunwoodie’s office. He asked me to give him my law business.” Indifferently, with the air of one considering the improbable, Lennox added: “Some day I may. Good-night.”</p>
			<p>But in the night into which he then went, already that day was breaking.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
