<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>Cassy’s department-store investments reached her the next day. Her father, who opened the door to them, fell back before the sum total of the C. O. D. With an arm in a sling, he could not hold the packages, much less pay for them, and he gasped as he called for aid.</p>
			<p>The money that Cassy then produced seemed to him darkly mysterious and although he believed as firmly in her virtue, as, before the break, he had believed in the maestria of his own right hand, none the less, in addition to aid, he exacted light.</p>
			<p>Cassy, dumping the packages on her bed, occupied herself in verifying the change which amounted to one cent. Then she sketched it.</p>
			<p>His surprise fell away. The mythical catamount, the imaginary concert, the ponderable subsidy⁠—two hundred and fifty, less ten percent⁠—seemed to him natural and an unnatural world.</p>
			<p>“And there’s about ten dollars remaining,” Cassy resumed. “Ten dollars and a penny. You can have the penny and I will keep the ten, or I’ll keep the ten and you can have the penny.”</p>
			<p>That also seemed natural. But the addition or subtraction disclosed a deficit and he exclaimed at it. “You said two hundred and fifty!”</p>
			<p>Cassy too saw the hole, but she could not lie out of it. “Well, I owed the difference.”</p>
			<p>In speaking she turned. Before her was a mirror in which she glanced at her hair that had been superiorly tralala’d. She turned again, reflecting that Lennox must have already received the postal-order, which she had mailed the night before, and wondering whether he had liked her little scrawl of indignant thanks.</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell you about it later,” she added. “Now I must get your dinner. How would you like a tenderloin, a salad, and a box of Camembert?”</p>
			<p>He shuffled. “There is no Camembert any more.” The tragedy of that seemed to overwhelm him. “I wish I were dead.”</p>
			<p>Cassy laughed. “Now it’s the cheese. On Saturday it was the violin. Well, you got it back. What will you say if I find some Camembert? Do stop meowing. Anyone might think you didn’t have me.”</p>
			<p>At her young laughter, he groaned. “Formerly if I let a day go without practising, I noticed it. If I let two days go, Toscanini noticed it. Now it’s weeks and weeks. It’s killing me.”</p>
			<p>To cheer him, Cassy said gaily: “The artist never dies.”</p>
			<p>But it did not cheer him. Besides, though Cassy had laughed, there had been a tugging at her heartstrings. Shabby, unkempt, in a frayed dressing-gown, his arm in a dismal sling, he looked so out of it, so forlorn, so old.</p>
			<p>He had shuffled away. She bit her lip. Later, when he had had his tenderloin and she had department-stored herself, a pint of grocer’s burgundy had reduced him to tears.</p>
			<p>The day before it had seemed to her that the frock would do. But her judgment had been hurried. Shops, crowds, the vibrations of both, devitalised and confused her. In choosing the frock she had not therefore given it the consideration which it perhaps did not merit, and now her mirror shrieked it. The frock was not suited to her. Nothing was suited to her, except the produce of baronial halls, where the simplest thing exceeded the dreams of avarice, or else the harlequinades which she herself devised. None the less she would have liked to have had her father exclaim and tell her how smart she looked. He omitted it.</p>
			<p>“Where are you going?”</p>
			<p>“I told you. Dinner and the opera.”</p>
			<p>“Opera! There is no opera tonight. What do you mean? What did you tell me?”</p>
			<p>On the table were dishes and the lamentable bottle. Cassy, in doubt whether to clear them then or later, hesitated. The hesitation he misconstrued.</p>
			<p>“You told me nothing. You tell me nothing. I am kept in the dark.”</p>
			<p>Cassy, adjusting the wrap which she had left open that he might admire the unadmirable, moved to where he sat and touched him. “You’re the silliest kind of a silly. I told you yesterday. Perhaps the opera was last night. But how could I go? Except that old black rag I had nothing to wear. If there is no opera tonight, there will be a concert or something. Don’t you remember now? I was at the telephone.”</p>
			<p>He did remember, but apparently the recollection displeased. He growled. “Yes. It was that Paliser.”</p>
			<p>“Well, why not? If it had not been for him, I would not have got the catamount’s money and you would not have had the burgundy.”</p>
			<p>But he was not to be mollified. The growl sharpened into a snarl. “Paliser! I don’t like the breed. By God, if⁠—”</p>
			<p>The peradventure of that Cassy got before he could utter it. Paliser! Of all men! The absurdity convulsed her. Her laughter ran up and down the scale.</p>
			<p>“You’re the dearest old duck of a goose I ever heard of.” She turned. Her wrap swished. “I only wish you were going too.”</p>
			<p>Below, in the street, a man, precipitatingly vacating the box of a machine, touched his cap at her. “Beg pardon, mem. Miss Cara? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser’s compliments and he’s sent a car.”</p>
			<p>Cassy glanced at the man, who looked like a Roman emperor. From the man she turned to the car. Superiorly and soberly finished, it beckoned. Now, though, the Caesar was holding open the door. Cassy got in. The emperor hopped up. The car leaped.</p>
			<p>On the front seat was a box with her name on it. In it was a handful of orchids. The luxury of the car, the beauty of the demon-flowers, the flight from the walk-up, yet more, perhaps, the caresses and surrenders of spring, affected her. If, she thought, if only the things that might be could be the things that are! If only⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>On the pale cushions she leaned back. Before her a curtain parted. In a wide, marble-flagged hall she was looking at a girl who was looking at her. A moment before he had said: “That is Miss Austen to whom I am engaged.” A moment before she had seen her picture. The girl was good to look at, so good that, without further acquaintance, you knew she was good through and through. There was no mistaking that. But was she good enough? Was any girl good enough for him? And who was that with her? Probably her mother who probably too was the catamount’s sister. They had a family likeness. Then at once the scene shifted. Cassy was in a room floored with thick rugs, hung with heavy draperies, and in that room the catamount had hired her to sing! But the disgust of it passed. The curtain fell. Cassy turned to the window, through which a breath of lilac blew.</p>
			<p>She sniffed and stared. Where was she? Where was the Riverside? Where, for that matter, was the roar of the glittering precinct in which the Splendor tossed its turrets to the sky? Here were dirty and reeling goblins; budding trees that bowed and fainted; a stretch of empty road that the scudding car devoured. Afar was a house that instantly approached and as suddenly vanished. Dimly beyond was another.</p>
			<p>Cassy, leaning forward, poked at the emperor. “I will thank you to tell me where you are going. Don’t you know where the Splendor is?”</p>
			<p>Back at her he mumbled, but what she could not hear.</p>
			<p>“Stop at once,” she called.</p>
			<p>Easily, without a quiver, almost within its own length, the car drew in and the Caesar, touching his cap, was looking at her. “Beg pardon, mem. There was a note for you in the box. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Paliser said⁠—”</p>
			<p>But now Cassy had it.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation" xml:lang="fr">Chère demoiselle⁠—</span>though I do not know why I call you that, except that it sounds less perfunctory than dear Miss Cara, who, I hope will do me the honour of dining in the country, if for no better reason than because there is no opera tonight and I am her obedient servant.</p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">jr.</abbr></p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Cassy looked up from it. “Country! He says country. What country? What does this mean?”</p>
			<p>“The Place, mem. Paliser Place. It’s not far now.”</p>
			<p>Cassy had not bargained for that. Stories of girls decoyed, drugged, spirited away, never heard of again, sprang at her. Quite as quickly she dismissed them. But, being human, she had to find fault.</p>
			<p>“You should have told me before. That will do. Drive on.”</p>
			<p>She sank back. The car leaped and she smiled. Paliser in the role of white-slaver! Her momentary alarm was now a mile behind her. But would they be alone? Though, after all, what did it matter? Yet in Harlem there was a broken old man who would not like it. And the basilica investments! If she had known she would have worn the black rag. But they would do for that tiresome <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish. As yet she had not decided what she would sing. The “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Caro nome</span>” occurred to her. Under her breath she began it and abruptly desisted. The <em>Dear Name</em> suggested another.</p>
			<p>For it she substituted the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Ombra leggiera</span>.” In its scatter of trills that mount, as birds mount, there were no evocations, though she did begin wondering again about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish’s music-room. If it were not too impossible she might give the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Ernani involame</span>.” But at that and very unintentionally she thought of Lennox again.</p>
			<p>She made a face and looked through the window. As usual she was hungry. The car now was bellowing through opening gates which, as she looked back, a man in brown was closing. On either side was a high stone wall, but beyond, as she looked again, was an avenue bordered with trees and farther on a white house with projecting wings in which was a court, an entrance and, above and about the latter, a pillared perron.</p>
			<p>From the entrance she could see a man in livery hastening. Behind him, a man in black appeared. The car stopped. The first man opened the door. Cassy got out. The other man additionally assisted by looking on and moving aside. Cassy went into a hall where a young person who did not resemble the Belle Chocolatière but whose costume suggested her, diligently approached.</p>
			<p>“Would madame care to go upstairs?”</p>
			<p>No, madame would not. But Cassy, instinctively insolent to pretentiousness, was very simple with the simple. “Thank you. Will you mind taking my wrap? Thank you again.”</p>
			<p>She looked about the hall. Before she could inventory it, here was another man. “A nice trick you played on me,” Cassy threw at him. “I was halfway before I discovered it. The orchids reconciled me. Thank you for them. Who is here?”</p>
			<p>Smiling, deferential, apparently modest, perfectly sent out in perfectly cut evening clothes, Paliser took her hand. “You are and, incidentally, I am.”</p>
			<p>Cassy withdrew her hand. “I suppose you think you are a host in yourself.”</p>
			<p>“Merely the most fortunate of mortals,” replied Paliser, who could be eighteenth-century when he liked, but who seldom bothered to keep it up.</p>
			<p>Already he had been doing a little inventorying on his own account. The basilica frock did not say much and what it did say was not to his taste. The Sunday night fantasy he much preferred. It was rowdy, but it was artistic. But beauty may be dishonoured, it cannot be vulgarised. Even in pseudo-Parisianisms Cassy was a gem. A doubt though, one that had already visited him, returned. Was the game worth the possible scandal?</p>
			<p>But now Cassy was getting back at him. “To stand about with the most fortunate of mortals ought to be a shape of bliss. As it happens, I would rather sit.”</p>
			<p>“Naturally. Only, worse luck, there is no throne.”</p>
			<p>Cassy gave it to him again: “There is a court fool, though. Where are your cap and bells?”</p>
			<p>“Not on you at any rate.”</p>
			<p>He motioned and Cassy passed on into a room beyond which other rooms extended, each different, but all in the same key, a monotone attenuated by lustres and the atmosphere, infinitely relaxing, which wealth exhales.</p>
			<p>Cassy’s thin nostrils quivered. Since childhood, it was her first breath of anything similar. It appeased and disarmed this anarchist who was also an autocrat.</p>
			<p>“Will you sit here?”</p>
			<p>Paliser was drawing a chair. The table before it lacked the adjacent severity. On it were dishes of Sèvres and of gold. Adjacently were three men. Their faces were white and sensual. They moved as forms move in a dream.</p>
			<p>The stories of girls decoyed, spirited away, never heard of again, returned to Cassy. She had put the orchids beside her. Her flexible mouth framed a smile.</p>
			<p>“You know, for a moment, I had the rare emotion of feeling and fearing that I was being eloped with.”</p>
			<p>A pop interrupted. She turned to a man at her elbow. “Only half a glass, please, and fill it with water.” She returned to Paliser, who was opposite. “I had been thinking of something. I had not noticed where the car was going; and all of a sudden, I found myself I did not know where. Then, houp! It got me.”</p>
			<p>Paliser helped himself to a clam. “The charm of elopements passed with the post-chaise. Then they had the dignity of danger and pistol shots through the windows. Nowadays you go off in a Pullman and return as prosaic as you started.”</p>
			<p>“Sometimes even more so,” Cassy put in.</p>
			<p>Paliser helped himself to another clam. “You speak feelingly and that is only right. This is a very important matter. It is a shame that romance should have passed with the post-chaise. Why should it not revisit us in the motor?”</p>
			<p>Cassy sipped and considered it. “There ought to be a law on the subject.”</p>
			<p>“There is one. You may be summoned for speeding and get your name in the papers.”</p>
			<p>“Then the dignity of danger remains.”</p>
			<p>“But not in clams. Aren’t you going to eat any?”</p>
			<p>Cassy laughed. “I had some yesterday with Ma Tamby. They did not seem to agree with her. She became very noisy about a <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish. Who is she?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish?” Paliser repeated. He also had forgotten. But, with a click, memory raised a latch. From behind it the lady emerged. “Oh, she’s a cousin of mine.”</p>
			<p>“Rather distant, I should fancy,” said Cassy, who was conscious of the delay, though not of the click. The delay she had noticed without, however, divining the cause. But how could she possibly imagine that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish had been evolved for the sole purpose of providing her with basilica opportunities? Yet the fault, if fault there were, resided in her education. She had never read Éliphas Lévi. She did not know that genii can be evoked.</p>
			<p>“Well, she is more my sister’s cousin than mine,” Paliser anxious to get out of it, threw in. “I mean my sister has a more cousinly nature.”</p>
			<p>“I did not know you had a sister,” said Cassy, who not only did not know but did not care. “Though, come to think of it, a sister with a cousinly nature must be so gratifying. Another distant relative, isn’t she?”</p>
			<p>“Very. She is in Petrograd.”</p>
			<p>That too was evocative. Cassy began talking about the biggest cropper that history has beheld⁠—a tsar tossed from the saddle to Siberia!</p>
			<p>Paliser, glad to be rid of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beamish, took it up. The sordid story of the Russian chief of staff, bought by Hindenburg and shot by the Grand-Duke Nicholas, whom the tsar then exiled, was told once more.</p>
			<p>“What else could you expect of that Hun?” Paliser concluded.</p>
			<p>“A Hun!” Cassy exclaimed. “Why he is a Romanov.”</p>
			<p>“No more than you are,” Paliser replied. “The last of the Romanovs married Catherine the Greater. There the breed ended. Paul, who followed and who married a German drab, was Catherine’s son but not her husband’s. The rest of the litter, down to the father of the recent incumbent, all married German drabs. The father of the ex-tsar married a Dane. The fellow is therefore one-eighth Dane and seven-eighths Hun. Totally apart from which, a grocer who knew his business would not have had him for clerk. His family knew that and, before he had time to be tsar, tried to poison him. To the misfortune, not of Russia merely, but of Christendom, they failed. If they had succeeded the eastern front would be secure. As for his wife, I saw her once. It was in the Winter Palace which, before it was sacked, was a palace. Since the palace of the Caliphs of Cordova crumbled, there has never been a palace like it. It outshone them all. Well, that woman tarnished it.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile dishes were brought and removed by servants, wooden-faced, yet with ears alert. The subject of elopements had seemed promising, but it led to nothing. At their own table, talk was gayer.</p>
			<p>Cassy enjoyed the food, the diluted wine, Paliser’s facile touch. He appeared to know a lot and she surprised herself by so telling him. “I wish I did,” she added. “I am ignorant as a carp.”</p>
			<p>“You know how to charm,” he replied. But, seeing her stiffen, he resumed, “With your voice. That is enough. It would be a mistake for you to be versatile. Versatility is for the amateur. The artist is a flower, never a bouquet.”</p>
			<p>It was decently said. In the decency of it, the agreeable insult which a compliment usually is was so chastened that Cassy flushed and felt that she had. It annoyed her, and she attributed it to the wine.</p>
			<p>It was not the wine. Other influences were at work on this girl, born to a forsaken purple and whose soul was homesick for it. But purple is perhaps picturesque. It was not that for which her soul sighed, but the dream that hides behind it, the dream of going about and giving money away. To her the dream had been the dream of a dream, realisable only on the top rungs of the operatic ladder, which, later, she felt she was not destined to scale. None the less there are dreams that do come true, though usually, beforehand, there is a desert to cross.</p>
			<p>“I wonder if I might have a cavatina?” Paliser asked, rising and moving to her.</p>
			<p>Cassy shrugged. I have to pay for my dinner, she thought, but she too got up.</p>
			<p>Preceding her, he led the way to a room of which the floor, inlaid and waxed, was rugless. The windows were not curtained, they were shuttered. In the centre was a grand and a bench. Afar, at the other end, masking a door, was a portière, the colour of hyacinth. Near it, were two unupholstered chairs; one, white; the other, black. Save for these, save too for a succession of mirrors and of lights, the room was bare. In addition, it was spacious, a long oblong, ceiled high with light frescoes, the proper aviary for a songbird.</p>
			<p>Cassy curtsied to it. At table she had not wanted to sing. The mere sight of this room inspired.</p>
			<p>Paliser opened the piano and, seating himself, ran his long thin fingers over the keys. He was heating them, preluding a score, passing from it to another. Presently he looked up; she nodded and the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Ah, non giunge</span>” floated from her.</p>
			<p>“Brava!” Paliser muttered as the final trill drifted away. Again he looked up. “You will be a very great artist.”</p>
			<p>He did not mean it. He judged her voice colourful but lacking in carriage.</p>
			<p>Cassy, leaning forward, struck the keys, giving him the note and again she sang, this time the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Libiamo</span>,” which, old as the hills, claptrap, utterly detestable, none the less served to display the bravura quality of her voice.</p>
			<p>When it passed, Paliser sprang up, faced her. “Open your mouth! There! Wide!”</p>
			<p>Cassy, familiar with the ritual, obeyed. Paliser peered into the strawberry of her throat. It was deep as a well and he moved back.</p>
			<p>“You have the organ but you do not know how to use it. You don’t know how to breathe.”</p>
			<p>Cassy forgot that he was young, that she was, that in the great room in the great house they were alone. Through the shutters came the smell of lilacs, the sorceries of spring. In the sexlessness of art these things were unnoticed. For the first time she liked him. It was his frankness that drew her, though if he had been a frank old woman she would have liked him as well.</p>
			<p>“My father says that. He says it is Ma Tamby’s fault. He can’t bear her.”</p>
			<p>For a while they discussed it. Paliser maintaining that were it not for the war she ought to go to Paris and Cassy asserting, though without conviction, that the specialty of the Conservatoire consisted in dried fruit.</p>
			<p>Finally she said: “It must be late. I have a wrap somewhere and oh! my orchids.”</p>
			<p>The young person was summoned. The wrap was recovered, the orchids reappeared.</p>
			<p>Paliser, helping Cassy with the wrap, said: “Shall I see it here again?” He knew he would but he thought it civil to ask.</p>
			<p>Cassy too had her thoughts. The freedom with which, during the ham-and-eggs episode, his eyes had investigated her, where was it? On Sunday he had bored her to tears. That also had gone. During the past hour or two he had shown himself reasonably intelligent, unpresuming, without offensiveness of any kind. With a movement of the hand she lifted the wrap at her neck. “Here?”</p>
			<p>It occurred to her that she did not know where the polished and inlaid floor on which she stood was located. Nor did she particularly care. Besides if her geography were vague, the floor was pleasant, a bit slippery perhaps, though just how slippery she was yet to learn.</p>
			<p>“Yes. The day after tomorrow. Why not? I would like to run over a score or two with you.”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens! You are not composing an opera, are you?”</p>
			<p>Paliser laughed. “I want to lead you away from painted mush into the arms of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Not Strauss?” Cassy interrupted. “Art does not recognise frontiers but the Huns do not either and I will not recognise a Hun. Is the car at the door?”</p>
			<p>He saw her out and away, and reentering the house went to a room in the wing. It was lined with bookcases that you did not have to break your back to examine. They began four feet from the floor and ended two feet higher. The room contained other objects of interest.</p>
			<p>From among the latter, Paliser helped himself to a brandy and soda. It had been dry work. The drink refreshed him. It stimulated too. Also it suggested. He put the glass down and lightly swore at it.</p>
			<p>“Damn Benny! He has only one thumb.”</p>
			<p>For a moment he eyed the glass. Then taking from a shelf Gautier’s very spiritual account of the de Maupin, he eyed that. Not for long though. He put it back. He did not want to read. He did not want to drink. There were several things that he did not want. In particular he did not want to be alone.</p>
			<p>He rang, ordered out a car and went sailing in town, to a brownstone front where you could lose as much money as you liked and not in solitude either. On the way, the thought of the damned and thumbless Benny accompanied him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
