<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXX</h2>
			<p>At the Athenæum, that afternoon, members gathered together, buttonholed each other, talked it over and so importantly that, if you had not known better, you might have thought the war a minor event. It gave one rather a clear idea of the parochialism of clubland. But then, to discuss the affairs of people who never heard of you is, essentially, a social act.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the shouted extras had told of Lennox’ arrest. The evening papers supplied the evidence.</p>
			<p>In them you read that Lennox had said he would “do” for Paliser, that in his possession had been found a stiletto, an opera-check, together with a will, and that, when apprehended, he had been effecting what is called a getaway.</p>
			<p>There you had the threat, the instrument, the opportunity and what more could you ask, except the motive? As for the rest, it was damning. On that point foregathering members agreed⁠—with one exception.</p>
			<p>In a seated group was Jones. His neighbours alarmed him. They belonged, he thought, to a very dangerous class, to a class which a sociologist defined as the most dangerous of all⁠—to the stupid. According to them, Lennox was not merely guilty, he was worse. He had besplattered the club with the blood of a man who, hang it all, whether you liked him or not, was also a member. The Athenæum would become a byword. Already, no doubt, it was known as the Assassin’s. Et cetera and so forth.</p>
			<p>The group thinned, increased, thinned again, scattered.</p>
			<p>Jones, alone with a survivor, addressed him. “How is my handsome friend to-day?”</p>
			<p>Verelst turned impatiently. “In no mood for jesting. I ought to have hurried him off. Now he is in jail.”</p>
			<p>Jones lit a cigarette. “There are honest men everywhere, even in jail, perhaps particularly in jail. Whom has he, do you know?”</p>
			<p>“To defend him? Dunwoodie. Ogston told me. Ogston says⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I daresay he does. His remarks are always very poignant.”</p>
			<p>“But look here. Before the arrest was known, Ogston was in this room telling everybody that, last night, he gave Lennox a seat in Paliser’s box. He will have to testify to it. He can’t help himself.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I can help him though. I was with Lennox at the time.”</p>
			<p>“You were? That’s awkward. You may have to corroborate him.”</p>
			<p>“I certainly shall. I have the seat.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“Lennox dropped the ticket. After he had gone, I found it on the floor. It is in my shop now.”</p>
			<p>“Well, well!” Verelst astoundedly exclaimed. “But, here, hold on. The papers say he had a return check.”</p>
			<p>Jones flicked his ashes. “I have one or two myself. Probably you have. Even otherwise return checks tell no tales, or rather no dates.”</p>
			<p>“I never thought of that.”</p>
			<p>“Think of it now, then.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but confound it, there is the stiletto.”</p>
			<p>“As you say, there it is and I wish it were here. It is mine.”</p>
			<p>Verelst adjusted his glasses. “What are you talking about?”</p>
			<p>“The war,” Jones answered. “What else? In my shop last evening, Lennox was drawing his will. In gathering up the sheets, the knife must have got among them and, without knowing it, he carried it off. This morning I missed it. The loss affected me profoundly. It is an old friend.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t tell me.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t I? I’ll go so far as to lay you another basket of pippins that the police can’t produce another like it. On the blade is inscribed Penetrabo⁠—which is an endearing device.”</p>
			<p>“But see here,” Verelst excitedly exclaimed. “You must tell Dunwoodie. You⁠—” In sheer astonishment he broke off.</p>
			<p>Innocently Jones surveyed him. “You think it important as all that?”</p>
			<p>“Important? Important isn’t the word.”</p>
			<p>With the same air of innocence, Jones nodded. “I thought it wasn’t the word. I should have said trivial.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—”</p>
			<p>Wickedly Jones laughed. “If you feel reckless enough to go another basket of pippins, I will wager that if I tell Dunwoodie anything⁠—and mind the ‘if’⁠—he will agree that the paper-cutter is of no consequence⁠—except to its lawful owner, who wants it back.”</p>
			<p>“But tell me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Anything you like. For the moment, though, tell me something.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>Jones blew a ring of smoke. “Do you happen to know whether Paliser had anything?”</p>
			<p>“What on earth has that to do with it?”</p>
			<p>Jones blew another ring. “I had an idea that his mother might have left him something. You knew her, didn’t you? Any way, you still know M. P. Did he ever say anything about it?”</p>
			<p>“He did not need to. It was in the papers. He made over to him the Splendor, the Place, and some Wall Street and lower Broadway property that has been part of the Paliser estate since the year One.”</p>
			<p>“What is it all worth?” Jones asked. “Ten or twenty million?”</p>
			<p>“Thirty, I should say. Perhaps more. But what has it to do with Lennox?”</p>
			<p>Negligently Jones flicked his ashes. “Well, it changes the subject. I can’t talk about the same thing all the time. It is too fatiguing.”</p>
			<p>As he spoke, he stood up.</p>
			<p>Verelst put out a hand. “Dunwoodie is sure to look in. Where are you off to?”</p>
			<p>Jones smiled at him. “I am going to gaze in a window where there are pippins on view.”</p>
			<p>“Go to the devil!” said Verelst, who also got up.</p>
			<p>Fabulists tell strange tales. It is their business to tell them. Jones had no intention of looking at pippins. What he had in mind was fruit of another variety. It was some distance away. Before he could make an appreciable move toward it, Verelst, who had turned from him, turned back.</p>
			<p>“There!”</p>
			<p>Beyond, through the high-arched entrance, a man was limping. He had the battered face of an old bulldog and the rumpled clothes of a young ruffian.</p>
			<p>“There’s Dunwoodie!”</p>
			<p>Verelst, a hand on Jones’ elbow, propelled him toward the lawyer, who gratified them with the look, very baleful and equally famous, with which he was said to reverse the Bench.</p>
			<p>But Verelst, afraid of nothing except damp sheets, stretched a hand. “You know Ten Eyck Jones. He has something very important to tell you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Jones. “In March, on the eighth or ninth, I have forgotten which, but it must be in the ‘Law Journal,’ a decision was rendered⁠—”</p>
			<p>He got no farther. Other members, crowding about, were questioning, surmising, eager for a detail, a prediction, an obiter dictum, for anything they could take away and repeat concerning the murder, in which all knew that the great man was to appear.</p>
			<p>But Dunwoodie was making himself heard, and not gently either. It was as though already he was at the district attorney’s throat.</p>
			<p>“Where is the evidence? Where is it? Where is the evidence? There is not a shred, not a scintilla. On the absence of facts adduced, I shall maintain what I assert until the last armed Court of Appeals expires. Hum! Ha!”</p>
			<p>Fiercely he turned on Jones. “What were you saying, sir?”</p>
			<p>Before Jones could reply, Verelst cut in. “The stiletto is his. He has the opera-ticket. He⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Imbeciles tell each other that great men think alike,” Jones, interrupting, remarked at Dunwoodie. “I merely happened to be forestalling your views, when a recent decision occurred to me and⁠—”</p>
			<p>Jones’ remarks were lost, drowned by others, by questions, exclamations, the drivel that amazement creates.</p>
			<p>“But, I say⁠—” “Tell me this⁠—” “No evidence!” “The stiletto his!” “How did Lennox get it?” “Then what about⁠—”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie, fastening on Jones, roared at him. “You tell me the instrument is yours?”</p>
			<p>Jones patted his chin. “I did not, but I will.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know, sir?”</p>
			<p>“It has a little love message on it.”</p>
			<p>“Hum! Ha!” Dunwoodie barked. “Come to my office to-morrow. Come before ten.”</p>
			<p>Dreamily Jones tilted his hat. “I am not up before ten. Where do you live? In the Roaring Forties?”</p>
			<p>But, in the mounting clamour, the answer, if answer there were, was submerged. Jones went out to the street, entered a taxi, gave an address and sailed away, up and across the Park, along the Riverside and into the longest thoroughfare⁠—caravan routes excepted⁠—on the planet.</p>
			<p>On a corner was a drug-shop, where anything was to be had, even to umbrellas and, from a sign that hung there, apparently a notary public also. Opposite was a saloon, the Ladies Entrance horribly hospitable. Jones’ trained eye⁠—the eye of a novelist⁠—gathered these things which it dropped in that bag which the subconscious is. Meanwhile the car, scattering children, tooted, turned and stopped before a leprous door.</p>
			<p>In the hall, a girl of twelve, with the face of a seraph, and the voice of a fiend, was shrieking at a switchboard. Jones fearing, if he addressed her, that she might curse him, went on and up, higher, still higher, and began to feel quite birdlike. On the successive landings were doors and he wondered what tragedies, what comedies, what aims, lofty, mean or merely diabolic, they concealed. They were all labelled with names, Hun or Hebrew, usually both. But one name differed. It caressed.</p>
			<p>There he rang.</p>
			<p>When it opened, a strawberry mouth opened also. “Oh!” Cassy’s blue eyes were red. There was fright in them. “It is horrible! Tell me, do you think it was he?”</p>
			<p>Jones removed his hat. “I know it was not.”</p>
			<p>That mouth opened again, opened for breath, opened with relief. Gasping, she stared. “Thank God! I was afraid⁠—⁠But are you sure? It was I who told him⁠—I thought it my fault. It was killing me. Tell me. Are you really sure?”</p>
			<p>Jones motioned. “His lawyer is. I have just seen him.”</p>
			<p>“He is! Thank God then! Thank God! And my father! It has made him ill. He liked him so! I am going for medicine now. Will you go in and speak to him?”</p>
			<p>She turned and called. “It is Mr. Jones⁠—a friend of Mr. Lennox.” She turned again. “I will be back in a minute.”</p>
			<p>Beyond, in the room with the piano and the painted warrior, the musician lay on a sofa, bundled in a rug. There was not much space on the sofa, yet, as Jones entered, he seemed to recede. Then, cavernously, he spoke.</p>
			<p>“Forgive me for not rising. This business has been too much for me. Sit down.”</p>
			<p>Jones put his hat on the table and drew a chair. “I am sorry it has upset you. It amounts to nothing.”</p>
			<p>Perplexedly the musician repeated it. “Nothing?”</p>
			<p>“I was referring to our friend Lennox.”</p>
			<p>“You call his arrest nothing?”</p>
			<p>“Well, everything is relative. It may seem unusual to be held without bail and yet, if we all were, it would be commonplace.”</p>
			<p>The musician plucked at the rug. “I suppose everybody thinks he did it?”</p>
			<p>“Everybody, no. I don’t think so and I am sure your daughter doesn’t.”</p>
			<p>“I wish she would hurry.”</p>
			<p>“Nor do you.”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t think so.”</p>
			<p>“I doubt if the police do either.”</p>
			<p>“After jailing him!”</p>
			<p>Jones, who had been taking in the room, the piano, the portrait, the table, sketched a gesture.</p>
			<p>“We are all in jail. The opinion of the world is a prison, our own ideas are another. We are doubly jailed, and very justly. We are depraved animals. We think, or think we think, and what we think others have thought for us and, as a rule, erroneously.”</p>
			<p>From a phonograph somewhere, in some adjacent den, there floated a tenor aria, the <i>Bella figlia del amore</i>, pierced suddenly and beautifully by a contralto’s rich voice.</p>
			<p>Jones turned. “That’s Caruso. I don’t know who the Maddelena is. Do you remember Campanini?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I remember him. He was a better actor than Caruso.”</p>
			<p>“And so ugly that he was good-looking. Caruso is becoming uneven.”</p>
			<p>Vaguely the musician considered the novelist. “You think so?”</p>
			<p>“It rather looked that way last night.”</p>
			<p>Angelo Cara plucked again at the rug.</p>
			<p>“But,” Jones continued, “in the ‘Terra addio’ he made up for it. What an enchantment that duo is!”</p>
			<p>The musician’s hand moved from the rug to his face. “You were there then?”</p>
			<p>I was this morning, thought Jones, but he said: “How sinful Rigoletto is by comparison to Aïda⁠—by comparison I mean to the last act.”</p>
			<p>The other duo now had become a quartette. The voices of Gilda and Rigoletto were fusing with those of the figlia and the duke.</p>
			<p>The musician appeared to be listening. His sunken eyes were lifted. Slowly he turned them on Jones.</p>
			<p>“You didn’t see anything, did you?”</p>
			<p>“Last night? I did not see Lennox, if that is what you mean, or Paliser⁠—except for a moment, during the crypt scene.”</p>
			<p>Chokingly the musician drew breath. In the effort he gasped. “Then you know.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know.”</p>
			<p>The rug rose and fell. It was as though there were a wave beneath it.</p>
			<p>With an air of detachment, Jones added: “Paliser turned to see who was there. A sword-cane told him.”</p>
			<p>The musician’s lips twitched, his face had contracted, his hand now was on his breast. “I wish Cassy would hurry. She’s gone for amyl.”</p>
			<p>“Is it far?”</p>
			<p>“The corner. Are you going to do anything?”</p>
			<p>Jones shook his head. “I don’t need to.”</p>
			<p>The sunken eyes were upon him. “Why do you say that?”</p>
			<p>“You are an honest man.”</p>
			<p>The sunken eyes wavered. “At least I never supposed they would arrest Lennox. How could I?”</p>
			<p>“No one could have supposed it. Besides, in your own conscience you were justified, were you not?”</p>
			<p>“You know about that, too?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know about that.”</p>
			<p>The Rigoletto disc now had been replaced by another, one from which a voice brayed, a voice nasal, jocular, felonious.</p>
			<p>“That beast ought to be shot,” Jones added.</p>
			<p>The musician raised himself a little. “You don’t misjudge her, do you?”</p>
			<p>Jones, annoyed at the swill tossed about, had turned from him. He turned back. “Believe me, Mr. Cara, there is no one for whom I have a higher respect.”</p>
			<p>A spasm seized the musician. For a moment, save for the effort at breath, he was silent. Then feebly he said: “I wish she would hurry.”</p>
			<p>“Can I do anything?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, tell me. Do you condemn me?”</p>
			<p>The novelist hesitated. “There are no human scales for any soul. Though, to be sure⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“It might have been avoided. As it is, they will suspect her.”</p>
			<p>“Cassy?”</p>
			<p>“Naturally. They can’t hold Lennox on a paper-cutter⁠—that belongs to me, and a few empty words said in my presence and which, if necessary, I did not hear. They can’t hold him on that. But when they learn, as they will, the circumstances of your daughter’s misadventure, they will arrest her.”</p>
			<p>“Merciful God!”</p>
			<p>The jeopardy to her, a jeopardy previously undiscerned, but which then shaken at him, instantly took shape, twisted his mouth into the appalling grimace that mediæval art gave to the damned.</p>
			<p>“And you don’t want that,” Jones remotely resumed.</p>
			<p>“Want it!” Galvanised by the shock, the musician sat suddenly up. “Last night, after I got back, I slept like a log. This morning, I felt if I had not done it, I would still have it to do and that satisfied me. But afterwards, when I learned about Lennox, it threw me here. Now⁠—⁠My God!”</p>
			<p>He fell back.</p>
			<p>The poor devil is done for, thought Jones, who, wondering whether he could get it over in time, leaned forward.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Cara, don’t you think you had best make it plain sailing for everybody, and let me draw up a declaration?”</p>
			<p>The disc now had run out. The grunt of the beast was stilled. From beyond came the quick click of a key. Almost at once Cassy appeared.</p>
			<p>She hurried to her father. “There were people ahead of me. They took forever. Has Mr. Jones told you? Mr. Lennox did not do it.”</p>
			<p>Breaking a tube in a handkerchief, she was administering the amyl and Jones wondered whether she could then suspect. But her face was turned from him, he could not read it, and realising that, in any event, she must be spared the next act, he cast about for an excuse to get her away. At once, remembering the notary, he produced him.</p>
			<p>“Your father wants me to draw a paper on which his signature should be attested. If I am not asking too much, would you mind going back to the druggist for the notary whose sign I saw there?”</p>
			<p>Cassy turned from her father. “A paper? What paper?”</p>
			<p>Bravely Jones lied. “A will.”</p>
			<p>Cassy looked from one to the other. “The poor dear often has these attacks. He will be better soon⁠—now that he knows. Won’t you, daddy?”</p>
			<p>Angelo Cara’s eyes had in them an expression infinitely tender, equally vacant. It was as though, in thinking of her, he was thinking too of something else. Though, as Jones afterward decided, he probably was not thinking at all.</p>
			<p>Cassy exclaimed at him. “Besides, what have you⁠—except me?”</p>
			<p>“Everybody has to make a will,” Jones, lying again, put in. “There has been a new law passed. The eternal revenue collector requires it.”</p>
			<p>Cassy smoothed the rug, put the handkerchief on the table, opened a drawer, got out some paper, a pen, a bottle of ink.</p>
			<p>In a moment she had gone.</p>
			<p>Jones seated himself at the table. “Forgive me for asking, but may I assume that you believe in God, a life hereafter and in the rewards and punishments which, we are told, await us?”</p>
			<p>The musician closed his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said Jones, who began to write:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>I, Angelo Cara, being in full possession of my senses and conscious of the immanence of death, do solemnly swear to the truth of this my dying declaration, which, I also solemnly swear, is made by me without any collusion with Keith Lennox. First; I firmly believe in God, in a life hereafter, and in future rewards and punishments. Second; I alone am guilty of the murder of Montagu Paliser, jr., whom I killed without aid or accomplices and without the privity or knowledge of any other person.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Jones, wishing that in his law-school days he had crammed less and studied more, looked up.</p>
			<p>“I cannot compliment you on your pen, Mr. Cara. But then, pen and ink always seem so emphatic. Personally, I prefer a pencil. Writing with a pencil is like talking in a whisper.”</p>
			<p>It was in an effort to deodorise the atmosphere, charged with the ghastly, that he said it. The declarant did not appear to notice. His sunken eyes had been closed. Widely they opened.</p>
			<p>“The other side!”</p>
			<p>Jones blotted the declaration. “The other side cannot be very different from this side. Not that part of it at least which people, such as you and I, first visit. A bit farther on, I suppose we prepare for our return here. For that matter, it will be very careless of us, if we don’t. We relive and redie and redie and relive, endlessly, ad infinitum. The Church does not put it in just that manner, but the allegory of the resurrection of the body and the life everlasting amounts, perhaps, to the same thing. ‘Never the spirit was born, the spirit shall cease to be never.’ That is the way Edwin Arnold expressed it, after the ‘Gita’ had expressed it for him. But probably you have not frequented the ‘Gita,’ Mr. Cara. It is an exceedingly⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Cassy’s lace dress is all torn. It was so pretty.”</p>
			<p>He is in the astral now, thought Jones, who said: “She will have a much prettier one.”</p>
			<p>But now again from the hall came that quick click and Cassy appeared, a little fat man behind her.</p>
			<p>Jones stood up. “How do you do. You know Mr. Cara. Mr. Cara wants his signature attested.”</p>
			<p>The little man exhibited his gold teeth. “With a will that is not the way. I told this young lady so but she would have it that I come along.”</p>
			<p>The young lady, who was taking her hat off, left the room.</p>
			<p>Jones fished in a pocket. “It is very good of you. Here, if you please, is your fee. The document is not a will, it is a release.”</p>
			<p>As the novelist spoke, he put the pen in the musician’s hand and, finding it necessary, or thinking that it was, for, as he afterward realised, it was not, he guided it.</p>
			<p>“You acknowledge this⁠—” the notary began. But at the moment Cassy returned and, it may be, distracted by her, he mumbled the rest, took the reply for granted, applied the stamp, exhibited his teeth. Then, at once, the hall had him.</p>
			<p>Cassy turned to Jones. Her face disclosed as many emotions as an opal has colours. Relief, longing, uncertainty, and distress were there, ringed in beauty.</p>
			<p>“Miss Austen ought to know how she has misjudged him. Do you suppose she would let me see her?”</p>
			<p>Bully for you! thought Jones, who said: “I cannot imagine any one refusing you anything.”</p>
			<p>In speaking, he heard something. Cassy turned. She too had heard it. But what?</p>
			<p>With a cry she ran to the sofa. “Daddy!”</p>
			<p>His face was grey, the grey that dawn has, the grey than which there is nothing greyer and yet in which there is light. That light was there. His upper-lip was just a little raised. It was as though he had seen something that pleased him and of which he was about to tell.</p>
			<p>“Daddy!”</p>
			<p>Jones followed her. He drew down the rug and bent over. After a moment, he drew the rug up, well up, and, with a forefinger, saluted.</p>
			<p>Cassy, tearing the covering back, flung herself there. Jones could not see her tears. He heard them. Her slim body shook.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
