<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>In high red boots, wide purple breeches and a yellow mandarin jacket, Jones entered the workshop.</p>
			<p>His appearance did not alarm him. He was invisible. Lloyd George and Clémenceau might have called. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ten Eyck Jones was not at home, sir. If necessary he was dead. Always, while he dressed, his servant put, unseen, a tray on the workshop table and, still unseen, disappeared. With the tray was the morning paper and the usual letters, which Jones never read. Morning in the workshop meant work. No interruptions permitted. On one occasion the house got on fire. His servant did not venture to tell him, though the firemen did. Apart from such outrages, necessarily infrequent, the only intrusion was the morning paper and the cat that talked in her sleep. The cat had many privileges, the paper had few. Sometimes it was briefly considered, more often it was not even looked at, but its great privilege consisted in being stacked.</p>
			<p>On this morning Jones did look, but quite involuntarily, and only because a headline caught his eye. It was the same headline from before which Cassy backed. The leaping words shouted at the girl. They shouted at the novelist, a circumstance which did not prevent him from breakfasting.</p>
			<p>The fruit, the crescents, the coffee he consumed, not as was customary, with his thoughts on his own copy, but on that which the paper supplied. It was very colourful. At the opera, the night before, Monty Paliser had been killed.</p>
			<p>In New York, many men are killed, but not so many are murdered and of those that are murdered, few are millionaires and fewer still have a box at the Metropolitan, where, apart from stage business, no one up to then had been done for. The case was therefore unique and, save for the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, without a parallel. In the circumstances, the leaded line of leaping words was justified.</p>
			<p>According to the story that followed and which, Jones realised, must have reached the city editor just as the paper was going to press, an attendant, whose duty it was to visit the boxes after the performance and see what, if anything, the occupants had forgotten, had, on entering Paliser’s box, found him at the back of it, unconscious, on the floor. There were no external marks of violence, but a commandeered physician pronounced him dead and, on examination, further pronounced that death was due to internal hemorrhage, superinduced by heart-puncture, which itself had been caused by some instrument, presumably a stiletto.</p>
			<p>A picturesque detail followed. The box at the right was owned by the Leroy Thompsons. The box at the left was the Harriwells’. At the late hour, an attempt to communicate with the former had failed, but over the wire, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Legrand Harriwell stated that the deceased had come in during the third act, that he had spoken to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harriwell, after which he had moved back and had either gone, or remained in the rear of the box. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harriwell knew nothing else, he had been unaware of anything occurring, he was not in the habit of spying about and he wished it distinctly understood that he must not be mixed up in the matter, or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harriwell either.</p>
			<p>The dear thing! thought Jones, who saw him, a tall, thin-lipped beast of a brute, with a haw-haw manner and an arrogant air. God bless him!</p>
			<p>But, Jones resumed to himself, voyons! The opera was Aïda. Paliser came in during the third act. The house then is brilliant. But during the fourth⁠—the duo in the crypt⁠—it is dark. It was then that he was done for and with what is assumed to have been a stiletto.</p>
			<p>To cut out the account, Jones turned in search of a dagger, long, thin, wicked, which, one adventurous night in Naples, he had found⁠—just in time⁠—in his back. On the blade was inscribed a promise, Penetrabo. Now his eyes roamed the table. He lifted the tray, lifted his copy, looked on the floor. Yet only the evening before, when Lennox was there and Cassy Cara had come, he had seen it. Since then it had gone.</p>
			<p>The disappearance did not disturb him. Occasionally, in hunting for an object, he found it in his hand. It is somewhere, he cogently reflected and, taking a pencil, set to work.</p>
			<p>But the muse was timorous as a chicken. The metaphor is entirely metaphorical. Jones had no faith in the wanton. He believed in regular hours, in silence and no interruptions. No intrusions of any kind. A letter was an intrusion, so also was the news of the day. These things he considered, when he did consider them, after his work was done. Sometimes he ignored them entirely. Usually he had a bushel of letters that he had not opened, a bale of papers at which he had not looked. Of such is the life known as literary or, at any rate, such was the life led by Jones.</p>
			<p>On this morning, his copy, ordinarily fluent enough, would not come. Ideas fluttered away just out of reach. The sequence of a chapter had been in his head. Like the dagger, it had gone. He could not account for that disappearance, nor did he try. It would turn up again. So, ultimately, would the ousted sequence. For the latter’s departure he did not try to account either. The effort was needless. He knew. An interruption had occurred. The news of the day had intruded itself upon him. A headline had entangled his thoughts.</p>
			<p>Abandoning the pencil, he lit a cigarette. Across the room, above the bookcase, was a stretch of silk, a flight of dragons that he had got in Rangoon. Above the silk was an ivory mask, the spoil of a sarcophagus, which he had found in Seville. He looked at them. The dragons fled on, the mask fell asleep. Something else took their place.</p>
			<p>On the wall was the scene at the opera.</p>
			<p>In the golden gloom of the darkened house, it showed Paliser, sitting back in his box, presumably enjoying the “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="it">Terra addio</span>,” for which Caruso had, as usual, been saving himself. Without, in the corridor, a figure furtively peering at the names on the doors. Then the voice of the soprano blending with that of the tenor and, during the divine duo, the door of the box opening, letting in a thread of light; Paliser turning to look and beholding that figure and a hand which, instantly descending, deepened the gloom forever.</p>
			<p>It was certainly <i>Terra addio</i>, Jones reflected. Certainly, too, the scene is easy enough to reconstruct But whose was the hand?</p>
			<p>Flicking his ashes, he looked about and saw two hands, between which, he also saw, he was entirely free to pick and choose. One hand, slight and fragile, was Cassy Cara’s. The other, firm and virile, was Lennox’.</p>
			<p>Lennox had threatened. He had been acidly murderous. He had a motive. He had the opportunity. He knew where Paliser would be. He had been supplied with a seat in that box. The hand was his. It was a clear case. That was obvious, particularly to Jones, who regarded the obvious as very misleading.</p>
			<p>Given the chance, he reflected, and Lennox might have done for Paliser, but he would have done for him with bare fists, never with a knife. It was not Lennox to use one. It was not Lennox at all.</p>
			<p>Jones threw him out and pulled in Cassy Cara.</p>
			<p>The case against her was equally clear. Presumably she owned the stiletto which a hat pin is. In addition, she also had a motive. If ever a girl had cause to up and do it, she had. Then, too, the risk was negligible. Any jury would acquit and tumble over each other to shake hands with her. For equity has justice that the law does not know. Moreover there are crimes that jurists have not codified. Some are too inhuman, others too human. Cassy’s righting of her own wrongs belonged among the latter. Cassy’s, that is, provided she had done it. But had she? Logically, yes. If the police could look behind the scenes, logically they would say to her, “Thou art the man.”</p>
			<p>But, Jones resumed, logic when pushed far enough becomes incoherence. The psychologist prefers vision and it would display none to believe that she did it. In the abstract, that is to be regretted. A lovely assassin! A beautiful girl slaying a recreant lover! A future prima donna killing a local millionaire! Monty Paliser murdered by the Viscountess of Casa-Evora! And at the opera! If I had ever put anything of the kind in my copy, reviewers would have indolently asked: “Why doesn’t this imbecile study life?”</p>
			<p>Jones laughed. The enjoyment of one’s own ideas⁠—or of the absence of them⁠—is a literary trait. When Dumas wrote, he roared.</p>
			<p>Here it is, then, Jones continued. If the police knew certain things they would nab Lennox. If they knew others, they would nab Cassy Cara. If they knew more, they would nab me. I should be held as a witness. This is cheerful, particularly as my sole complicity in the matter has been due to a desire to be of use. But that is just it. Through the enigmatic laws of life, any kindness is repaid in pain.</p>
			<p>Pleasurably, for a moment, he considered the altruism of that aphorism. Then he got back at the murder which, he decided, must have been premeditated by some one who knew where Paliser would be. That conclusion reached, he groped for another. Lennox knew, but did Cassy know, and, if she did, had she utilised the knowledge?</p>
			<p>To decide the point he reviewed the visit of the previous evening.</p>
			<p>Ostensibly Cassy’s visit had been occasioned not by any wish to relate what had happened to her, but to acquaint Lennox with the cause of what had happened to him. In view of what had befallen her, the proceeding was certainly considerate. In the misadventures of life, the individual is usually so obsessed by his own troubles that they blind him to those of another. But ostensibly Cassy had sunk her troubles and had pulled them up, not to exhibit them, but to show Lennox the lay of the land as it affected not her at all but him. The proceeding was certainly considerate⁠—unless it were astute, unless her object had been to employ Lennox for the wreaking of her own revenge.</p>
			<p>That was possible, but was it probable?</p>
			<p>An ordinary young woman would have gone at it differently, gone at it hammer and tongs. Cassy’s methods were merely finer. That was the common sense view. But was it psychology? The common sense view that is applicable to the average individual is inapplicable to a problematic nature and, consequently, not to Cassy, who must therefore have had another incentive for her visit, an incentive stronger than the primitive instinct for revenge.</p>
			<p>But, Jones asked himself, what are the fundamental principles of human activity? They are self-preservation and the perpetuation of the species. Every idea that has existed, or does exist, in the mind of man is the result of the permutations and combinations of those two principles, of which the second is the stronger and its basis is sex. That is what actuated Cassy. She is, or was, in love with Lennox, and told him for no other reason.</p>
			<p>That is it, Jones decided. But the course of her true love could not have run very smooth and, knowing that Lennox was otherwise interested, she took up with Paliser out of pique.</p>
			<p>Pique! he repeated. But no, that is not Cassy Cara either. She⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>Like a thread snapped suddenly, the novelist’s meditations ceased. On the wall before him the dragons alighted, the mask awoke. Between them a canvas was emerging. Dim, shadowy, uncertain, it hesitated, wavered, advanced.</p>
			<p>Then, as it hung unsupported in the air⁠—far too unsupported, he presently thought⁠—he looked it over.</p>
			<p>To apparitions he was accustomed. They were part of his equipment. Unsummoned, without incantations they came, sent, one might think, by the muse whom he derided, but more naturally and very simply produced by the machinery in his brain.</p>
			<p>Now, as he examined the canvas, its imprecision diminished, the shadows passed, the obscurity lifted, the penumbra brightened, outlines defined themselves, the colouring appeared, a colouring, after the manner of Rembrandt, composed of darkness in which there is light and which, as such, reveals.</p>
			<p>Jones stood up, turned around and sat down again as gamblers, disquieted by their luck, will do.</p>
			<p>Before him still the picture floated. He disavowed it, disowned it. Yet there it was, the child of his fancy, the first-born of the morning, the fruit of his concentrated thought, and as, surprisedly, he considered it, it took on such semblances of legitimacy, that the disavowals ceased. Then, slowly disintegrating, its consistence lessened. It was departing, vaporously as it had come. Jones waved at it, omitting out of sheer abstraction to say Au revoir, yet omitting also, and through equal modesty, to say Eureka!</p>
			<p>He pressed a button. Instantly, as though sprung from a trap, his servant appeared.</p>
			<p>“Get <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox on the telephone.”</p>
			<p>The minutes lengthened. Finally the servant reappeared.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox is not at home, sir. His man says he’s gone to Centre Street. He’s been arrested. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lennox has been arrested. Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>Pausing, the servant cocked an ear and added: “They’re calling extras, sir. Would you wish one?”</p>
			<p>Circuitously, through the open door, the cat, her tail in the air, approached and wowed.</p>
			<p>Jones leaned over and tickled her in the stomach. The cat hopped up on him. He put a finger to his forehead, held it there, removed it and looked at the man.</p>
			<p>“In war-time, with the price of everything going up, it is a criminal waste of money to buy an extra⁠—particularly when you know what isn’t in it.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>Jones motioned. “Look through the old newspapers. Among the March issues there is one that has an article entitled ‘The Matter of Ziegler.’ Let me have it.”</p>
			<p>The cat, now on his shoulder, purred profusely in his ear. Raising a hand, he tickled her again.</p>
			<p>“Mimi-Meow, this Matter of Ziegler may interest us very much and after we have looked it over, I will attend to our friend von Lennox, who seems to have become a Hun.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
