<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>Later that day, Jeroloman, the attorney for the other side, who at the time had no idea that there was another side, or any side at all, entered the rotunda and asked for Dunwoodie.</p>
			<p>In asking, he removed his hat, glanced at its glisten, put it on again. The hat was silk. It topped iron grey hair, steel-blue eyes, a turn-under nose, a thin-lipped mouth, a pointed chin, a stand-up collar, a dark neckcloth, a morning coat, grey gloves, grey trousers, drab spats and patent-leather boots. These attributes gave him an air that was intensely respectable, equally tiresome. One pitied his wife.</p>
			<p>“This way, sir.”</p>
			<p>In the inner and airy office, Dunwoodie nodded, motioned at a chair.</p>
			<p>“Ha! Very good of you to trouble.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman, seating himself, again removed his hat. Before he could dispose of it, Dunwoodie was at him.</p>
			<p>“Young Paliser’s estate. In round figures what does it amount to?”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman, selecting a safe place on the table, put the hat on it and answered, not sparringly, there was nothing to spar about, but with civil indifference: “Interested professionally?”</p>
			<p>“His widow is my client.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman’s eyes fastened themselves on Dunwoodie, who he knew was incapable of anything that savoured, however remotely, of shysterism. But it was a year and a day since he had been closeted with him. In the interim, time had told. Diverting those eyes, he displayed a smile that was chill and dental.</p>
			<p>“Well, well! We all make mistakes. There is no such person.” He paused, awaiting the possible protest. None came and he added: “The morning after the murder, his father told me that the young man contemplated marriage with a lady who had his entire approval. Unfortunately⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yaas,” Dunwoodie broke in. “Unfortunately, as you say. The morning after was the 26th. On the 21st, a gardener, who pretended to be a clergyman, officiated at his marriage to my client.”</p>
			<p>Dryly but involuntarily Jeroloman laughed. Dunwoodie was getting on, getting old. In his day he had been remarkably able. That day had gone.</p>
			<p>“Well, well! Even admitting that such a thing could have happened, it must have been only by way of a lark.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie whipped out his towel. “You don’t say so!”</p>
			<p>Carelessly Jeroloman surveyed him. He was certainly senile, yet, because of his laurels, entitled to all the honours of war.</p>
			<p>“Look here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie. You are not by any chance serious, are you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m looking. While I was about it, I looked into the case. <i xml:lang="la">Per verba de præsenti</i>, my client consented to be young Paliser’s wife. Now she is his widow.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman weighed it. The weighing took but an instant. Dunwoodie was living in the past, but there was no use in beating about the bush and he said as much.</p>
			<p>“You are thinking of the common law, sir.”</p>
			<p>Absently Dunwoodie creased his towel. “Now you mention it, I believe I am.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman glanced at his watch. It was getting late. His residence was five miles away. He was to dress, dine early and take his wife to the theatre. He would have to hurry and he reached for his hat.</p>
			<p>“The common law was abrogated long ago.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie rumpled the towel. “Why, so it was!”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman took the hat and with a gloved finger rubbed at the brim. “Even otherwise, the term common-law wife is not legally recognised. The law looks with no favour on the connection indicated by it. The term is synonymous for a woman who, having lived illicitly with a man, seeks to assume the relationship of wife after his death and thereby share in the proceeds of his property.”</p>
			<p>From under beetling brows, Dunwoodie looked at him. “Thanks for the lecture, Jeroloman. My client has no such desire. In this office, an hour ago, she refused them.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman stood up. “Very sensible of her, I’m sure.” He twirled the hat. “Who is she?”</p>
			<p>“I thought I told you. She is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paliser.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman waved that hat. “Well, well! I thought I told you. As it is, if you will take the trouble to look at the laws of 1901, you will find that common-law marriages are inhibited.”</p>
			<p>“Hum! Ha! And if you will trouble to look at the Laws of 1907, you will find they are inhibited no longer.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman stared. “I have yet to learn of it.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie repocketed his towel. “Is it possible? Then when the opportunity occurs you might inform yourself. At the same time let me recommend the Court of Appeals for March. You may find there additional instruction. But I see you are going. Don’t let me detain you.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman sat down. “What case are you referring to?”</p>
			<p>“The Matter of Ziegler.”</p>
			<p>Uncertainly Jeroloman’s steel-blue eyes shifted. “It seems to me I read the syllabus.”</p>
			<p>“Then your powers of concealment are admirable.”</p>
			<p>“But just what does it hold?”</p>
			<p>“Can it be that you don’t remember? Well, well!⁠—to borrow your own agreeable mode of expression⁠—it holds that common-law marriages that were valid before and until the enactments which you were good enough to cite, were again made valid by their appeal in Chapter 742 of the Laws of 1907.”</p>
			<p>“But,” Jeroloman began and paused. “But⁠—” He paused again.</p>
			<p>Comfortably Dunwoodie helped him. “Yes?”</p>
			<p>“You say that marriages valid before and until the Laws of 1901 are, by virtue of a repeal, now valid again?”</p>
			<p>“That is what I say, Jeroloman. Merely that and nothing more. In addition to the Ziegler case, let me commend to you ‘<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Raven</span>.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Let’s get down to facts, sir. From your account of it, this alleged marriage never could have been valid.”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie wiped his mouth. “Dear me! I had no idea that my account of it could lead to such interesting views. You do surprise me.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunwoodie, you said the ceremony was performed by a gardener who pretended to be a clergyman. Those were your very words.”</p>
			<p>“Yaas. Let the cat out of the bag, didn’t I?”</p>
			<p>Archly but chillily Jeroloman smiled. “Well, no, I would not care to put it in that way, but your office-boy must know that false representations void it.”</p>
			<p>“Good Lord!” Dunwoodie exclaimed. It was as though he had been hit in the stomach.</p>
			<p>Jeroloman, who was eyeing him, gave a little nod that was tantamount to saying, “Take that!”</p>
			<p>But Dunwoodie was recovering. He sat back, looked admiringly at Jeroloman, clasped his hands and twirled his thumbs.</p>
			<p>Jeroloman, annoyed at the attitude and in haste to be going, pursed his thin lips. “Well, sir?”</p>
			<p>With an affability that was as unusual as it was suspicious, Dunwoodie smiled at him. “Your objection is well taken. Not an hour ago, in that chair in which you are sitting, this lady, my client, who not once in her sweet life has opened the Revised Statutes, and who, to save it, could not tell the difference between them and the Code, well, sir, she entered that same objection.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t see⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nor did she, God bless her! And I fear I wearied her with my reasons for not sustaining it. But I did not tell her, what I may confide in you, that in <i epub:type="se:name.legal-case">Hays versus The People</i>⁠—25 New York⁠—it is held immaterial whether a person who pretended to solemnise a marriage contract, was or was not a clergyman, or whether either party to the contract was deceived by false representations of this character. Hum! Ha!”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman pulled at his long chin. In so doing he rubbed his hat the wrong way. He did not notice. That he was to dress, dine early, take his wife to the theatre, that it was getting late and that his residence was five miles away, all these things were forgotten. What he saw were abominations that his client would abhor⁠—the suit, the notoriety, the exposure, the whole dirty business dumped before the public’s greedy and shining eyes.</p>
			<p>“Who is she?” he suddenly asked.</p>
			<p>“Who was she?” Dunwoodie corrected. “Miss Cara.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman started and dropped his hat. “Not⁠—?”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie nodded. “His daughter.”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman, bending over, recovered his hat. Before it, a picture floated. It represented an assassin’s child gutting the estate of a son whom the father had murdered. It was a bit too cubist. Somewhere he had seen another picture of that school. It showed a young woman falling downstairs. He did not know but that he might reproduce it. At least he could try. Meanwhile it was just as well to take the model’s measure and again his eyes fastened on Dunwoodie.</p>
			<p>“What do you suggest?”</p>
			<p>Dunwoodie, loosening his clasped hands, beat with the fingers a tattoo on his waistcoat.</p>
			<p>“Let me see. There is ‘<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Raven</span>,’ the first primer, the multiplication table. Is it for your enlightenment that you ask?”</p>
			<p>Jeroloman moistened his lips. Precise, careful, capable, intensely respectable, none the less he could have struck him. A moment only. From the sleeve of his coat he flicked, or affected to flick, a speck.</p>
			<p>“Yes, thank you, for my enlightenment. You have not told me what your client wants.”</p>
			<p>“What a woman wants is usually beyond masculine comprehension.”</p>
			<p>Methodically Jeroloman dusted his hat. “You might enquire. We, none of us, favour litigation. In the interests of my client I always try to avoid it and, while at present I have no authority, yet⁠—⁠Well, well! Between ourselves, how would a ponderable amount, four or five thousand, how would that do?”</p>
			<p>Blandly Dunwoodie looked at this man, who was trying to take Cassy’s measure.</p>
			<p>“For what?”</p>
			<p>“To settle it.”</p>
			<p>That bland air, where was it? In its place was the look which occasionally the ruffian turned on the Bench.</p>
			<p>“Hum! Ha! Then for your further enlightenment let me inform you that my client will settle it for what she is legally entitled to, not one ponderable dollar more, not one ponderable copper less.”</p>
			<p>Mentally, from before that look, Jeroloman was retreating. Mentally as well, already he had reversed himself. He had judged Dunwoodie old, back-number, living in the past. Instead of which the fossil was what he always had been⁠—just one too many. Though not perhaps for him. Not for Randolph <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Jeroloman. Not yet, at any rate. The points advanced were new, undigested, perhaps inexact, filled with discoverable flaws. Though, even so, how <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> would view them was another kettle of fish. But that was as might be. He put on his hat and stood up.</p>
			<p>“Very good. I will give the matter my attention.”</p>
			<p>“Do,” Dunwoodie, with that same look, retorted, “And meanwhile I will apply for letters of administration. Hum! Ha! My compliments to your good lady.”</p>
			<p>He turned in his chair. Attention, indeed! He knew what that meant. The matter would be submitted to <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. P.</abbr> The old devil had not a leg to stand on, he lacked even a crutch, and in that impotent, dismembered and helpless condition he would be thrown out of court. A ponderable amount! Hum!</p>
			<p>For a moment he considered the case. But it may be that already it had been heard and adjudged. Long since, perhaps, at some court of last resort, the Paliser Case had been decided.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
